Pregnant women have been cautioned to be extra careful during spikes in temperatures. A global study by a team of researchers at Wits University found that the frequency and intensity of heatwaves and other extreme weather events is increasing rapidly as a result of climate change. And these weather phenomena are set to escalate in the coming decades. Heatwaves and rising temperatures present major health threats, especially for populations with limited physiological ability or socio-economic means to respond or adapt. Lead author and research professor at Wits University, Matthew Chersich said pregnant women have only recently been included among the groups most vulnerable to heat stress, and it will take time for that recognition to translate into action. Studies in 2011 and 2015 showed that the large majority of heatwave response plans in EU countries had not identified pregnant women as a high risk group. The public also appears largely unaware of the risks of heat exposure during pregnancy. Chersich said several factors could account for the relative neglect of maternal and newborn health in research and policies on the impacts of, and adaptation to, climate change. “Pregnancy raises the vulnerability of women to environmental hazards, including exogenous heat. The physiological and anatomical changes that occur during pregnancy pose particular challenges to thermoregulation. Internal heat production rises with fetal and placental metabolism, and with increased body mass and the resulting physical strain,” he said. The research further showed that pregnancy could bring social vulnerabilities to the fore, especially in low and middle income countries, where women often continue to perform household chores during pregnancy (for example, fetching wood and water, and subsistence farming). “Exposure to high temperatures in agricultural and other outdoor work, could occur before the pregnancy is recognised, and, even late in pregnancy, poorer women might work beyond their heat tolerance limits to avoid losing pay,” said Chersich. The team looked at the records of 14 880 people and 175 full text articles were screened during 70 studies in 27 countries, seven of which were countries with low or middle income. Chersich said in 40 of 47 studies, pre-term births were more common at higher than lower temperatures. Exposures were classified as heatwaves, 1°C increments, and temperature threshold cutoff points. In random effects metaanalysis, odds of a pre-term birth rose 1.05-fold per 1°C increase in temperature and 1.16-fold during heatwaves. “The systematic review findings, in particular, the size and relative consistency of associations and dose response patterns, appear to support the hypothesis that heat exposure increases the likelihood of adverse pregnancy outcomes. This is even more remarkable as measurement of gestation is subject to a range of errors, which are probably non-differential, biasing findings to the null, whereas one might expect data on birth weight to be of higher quality,” said Chersich. And while expecting pregnant women have been warned, there are some steps that expecting moms can do to keep baby and herself safe. Low-cost interventions are available to reduce the burden of heat-related conditions, these include: increased natural ventilation and cooling interventions in labour wards, prioritisation of hydration during labour and in neonates, heat “counselling” by birth companions, heat-warnings and plans. Heat interventions should build on existing education and support mechanisms around breastfeeding especially important during extreme heat Parent-child skin-to-skin contact, ideally beginning at birth, supports thermoregulation in neonates and could allow the mother to monitor the neonate’s condition during heatwaves. Chersich said heat-health plans are relatively well developed but pregnant women have only recently been identified as a vulnerable group and remain a neglected focus in much adaptation policy and planning, but also in public awareness. The Saturday Star