You might look and feel good, but while you are going on with your daily life, there could be cancerous cells spreading inside your body without you even noticing. Even youngsters and those who commit themselves towards a healthy lifestyle are not exempt from getting diagnosed with a wide range of the deadly disease, with breast cancer being most prevalent amongst women of all ages. In light of this distressing reality, scientific brand optiphi® Helix is this Breast Cancer Awareness month, urging South Africans from all walks of life to educate themselves about the disease which causes abnormal cells to divide uncontrollably and destroy body tissue. In a bid to equip them with all information to prevent the spread of cancer, Skin Rejuvenation Technologies, a subsidiary of the Southern Medical Group and the driving force behind optiphi® Helix is using revolutionary technological tools to empower women to improve their overall breast health. Last year, they developed an advanced genetic laboratory to evaluate and identify the genetic risk factors associated with skin concerns, health and diet and more specifically, breast cancer by means of genetic profiling. Dr Samantha Baron from optiphi® Helix explained that this could prove to be vital in the fight against cancer. “The intention of the optiphi® Helix Breast, Ovarian and Prostate Cancer Risk Test is to screen a panel of markers that have been commonly associated with the development of breast cancer with some markers also associated with increased risk for ovarian and prostate cancer and the screening of these markers creates awareness to the potential risks associated with these cancers.” “Knowing and understanding your risk factors for breast cancer is essential for preventative treatment strategies,” she said. Baron explained that while there are many things people can do to reduce their cancer risks including eating healthy, exercising, controlling their alcohol consumption and quitting smoking, there are many other risk factors which can’t be controlled. “For this reason, it is important to look at the potential that genetic testing can have on expanding our awareness on certain genetic risk factors that we have no control over.” “Knowing and understanding your genetic risk creates that added awareness enabling you to promote more regular self-screenings, check ups and other preventative measures,” the optiphi® Helix doctor insisted. Despite giving people some control over cancer, Baron explained that their genetic testing for breast and ovarian cancer can’t be used as a diagnostic tool, but rather an instrument to determine one’s potential future risk. “This odds ratio is not a diagnostic value, but merely a guide to determine the risk ratio from a genetic perspective, it is not intended to be a diagnosis or prediction for future health.” She added that the genetic risk for breast cancer is considered to be a polygenic model, which involves more than one gene, and so looking at several genes is vital when determining the potential genetic risk of an individual. “Each single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) will carry a different weight (risk ratio) which will also depend on if it’s a heterozygous/homozygous mutation.” “The combination of these risk ratios is what determines a person's overall genetic risk.” “In most instances, you will see that one SNP alone carries a rather small (sometimes insignificant) risk but certain SNPs together increase your risk and these factors are all considered when you do genetic risk screening.” While youngsters often feel invincible,  Baron insisted that they too carry a cancer risk and that attending to their health as young as possible could ultimately save their lives. “Growing evidence shows that the youth and young adult years are significant times for helping prevent breast cancer later in life.” “It is never too early to start with a healthy lifestyle.” The Saturday Star