Haroon Lorgat is a difficult man to get hold of. The 60-year-old has been given a mandate to stabilise Cricket South Africa (CSA) in three months, so it’s no surprise that the embattled cricket body’s new independent director has had his hands full lately. And he is ready for the challenge. But he admits, he isn’t ecstatic at re-joining CSA under such terrible circumstances. “To state my feelings honestly, Cricket South Africa is clearly not in good shape and nobody, enjoys entering an organisation when it is in a state of chaos and crisis.” Last week, CSA announced that they had appointed a new interim board to address a host of issues engulfing the organisation. Lorgat has been appointed as an Independent Director, while his team is comprised of Omphile Ramela (president of the South African Cricketers’ Association), Andre Odendaal (former CEO of Western Province Cricket), Judge Zak Yacoob (former justice of the Constitutional Court), Starvos Nicolau (senior executive in the pharmaceutical industry), Judith February (lawyer and governance specialist), Andile Dawn Mbatha (chief financial officer of the Independent Electoral Committee), Nkeko Caroline Mampuru (deputy head of the special investigation unit – a forensic investigation and litigation agency) and Xolani Vonya (former head of Eastern Province Cricket). Their task, according to Cricket South Africa, is to restore public confidence in the game of cricket among all its stakeholders, particularly the players, media and the cricket-loving public. Sports Minister Nathi Mthethwa has given the interim board just three months to complete their mandate. This is a short time frame considering the cricket body’s deep financial, commercial and reputational crisis, the likes of which it hasn’t been in since re-admission to international cricket post-apartheid. “It’s hard for me to say at this early stage whether this is the biggest challenge I have ever had because I don’t know or understand the full extent of the damage and the multiple issues needing to be addressed,” says Lorgat. “But clearly, the sense for me and for many others, created by many months of negative reports, is that the task for the interim board will be huge.” Lorgat returns to the fold, having walked away from CSA in 2017 due to differences with a board that was in the early stage of its rot. “It is easier to damage or destroy an organisation’s reputation and financial standing, while on the other hand, it takes years to build it,” says Lorgat. “I believe the interim board has a huge task ahead to restore the credibility and confidence in CSA and its management.” Despite Mthethwa giving the new interim board just three months to turn things around, Lorgat knows that it will take time and patience for him and his team to put the cricket body on the right path. “It’s clearly a tough ask, but the reality is that we don’t have the luxury of time, so we will need to do our very best to meet the time frame. “The Minister did say an extension would be permitted, if necessary. I also believe it is not possible and neither do I think that it is expected of the interim board to repair all the damage. “We will deal with the most important, and particularly, the structural issues in order to set Cricket South Africa on a better path before a permanent new board will take on the responsibility to attend to the rest of the work.” Lorgat says things must be done right from the get go to put the cricket body on the right path. “We need to do the right things, no matter how difficult, and we must be prepared to make the tough calls that will be required to set the organisation right. “Life has taught us that there is never a quick fix. But I do believe that we can reset the organisation on the right path, and in time, things will start looking better for CSA.” Things are already looking up for the cricket body, with reports this week that CSA is set for a massive cash injection of about R1.5 billion from an Indian pay-television broadcaster for the rights to the embattled cricket body’s content in the subcontinent. Media reports this week claim pay-channel Star will be the exclusive broadcast rights holders of CSA’s content in the subcontinent after, in principle, agreeing a lucrative deal that is worth between $95m (about R1.49 billion) and $105m over the next four years. The two parties are finalising the finer details of the contract, and it is only a matter of time before an official announcement is made. Lorgat says he is also extremely pleased with the interim board that has been assembled to help him accomplish a turn-around. “It’s actually refreshing to sit with new and capable people,” says Lorgat. “Clearly, the Minister and Members Council have thought carefully when they selected the interim board.” Lorgat’s elevation to the hot seat has seemingly calmed the fears of cricket fans in the country, having come in with a near-impeccable record in cricket administration. Over the years, Lorgat, in his capacity as International Cricket Council chief executive, was faced with navigating the immense challenge of terrorism’s threat to cricket in Pakistan, an uprising in spot-fixing in the game and declining interest in Test cricket. Asked how he felt about cricket fans feeling safe with him at the helm, Lorgat says that’s added pressure to deal with. “That’s pressure. But it is good to know that fans have expressed confidence in the new interim board. That will spur us on to work even harder.” Having been in the hot seat for just a week, Lorgat says things have been going well so far. “It’s only been a few days, but the interim board has started working at pace. The chair is a clear thinker and a strong driver, which is exactly what we need at this time. I have no doubt that the interim board will feel satisfied only if we succeed in setting CSA on a new path for success.” Meanwhile, newly appointed to the CSA Interim Board, lawyer and governance expert, Judith February, said they would do everything possible to turn things around “We want to ensure that those responsible for misdeeds and bringing the game and the organisation into disrepute, are held to account,” said February. “The new board also looks forward to working shoulder-to-shoulder with CSA’s dedicated employees who have never lost sight of the organisation’s mandate to develop and uplift cricket. “Taking immediate action is paramount to the progress of the game.” The Saturday Star