By Staff Reporter The Grade 12 class of 2020 has been given a powerful new tool to help them ace their final exams. And the welcome help comes compliments of the Redhill MasterClasses, powered by SubjeX. The initiative is an innovative series of online videos featuring content provided by expert educators from Redhill School and is the brainchild of student entrepreneurs Max Coleman and Jack Scott-King. The duo used their existing EdTech platform to host the videos, harnessing its stability and scalability to allow for a quick time-to-market. “When we first launched SubjeX, we were students ourselves and could relate on a personal level to the unique challenges that students face,” said the duo. The pair said when they saw the enormous impact Covid-19 had on Grade 12 students, they knew they had to step in and do what they could to provide much-needed class time, exam preparation, and the ability to pause, rewind and revisit challenging sections of the syllabus. A series of expert online videos ticked all the boxes – and they just needed to find the best content. Coleman and Scott-King approached Redhill School in Sandton, and the the result is a powerful series of videos, expertly captured and animated with additional graphics. Each subject series has been carefully curated to give students the most bang for their buck, while also providing additional tips and tricks to give students the edge. Joseph Gerassi, executive head of Redhill School, said the project has been both exciting and seamless. “In projects such as this, you tend to buy into the ‘why’ and then figure out the ‘how’ along the way. With the SubjeX team, the ‘how’ was already taken care of so we could focus on what we do best – educating students and caring for the greater community.” A core element of the project is to provide free access to various education upliftment partners, including students from Alexandra Education Committee (AEC), the Tomorrow Trust and iSchoolAfrica – which already have free access to the Redhill MasterClass Series. “We firmly believe emerging EdTech has enormous potential to level the playing field when it comes to access to quality educational resources. “Making the Redhill MasterClass Series videos freely available to disadvantaged students is an important step in this direction,” concluded Coleman and Scott-King. Coleman co-founded SubjeX in 2017, while attending high school at St David’s in Inanda, where he matriculated in 2019. He added that creating the MasterClass series allowed him to marry his passion for innovation and technology with his drive to improve the lives of all South African students. He is currently studying Business Science at UCT. Scott-King teamed up with Coleman while attending high school at St John’s College, where he matriculated in 2019. He said it was this desire to reach out and share his experiences as a student and provide guidance to those who need it that led to him co-founding SubjeX and creating the MasterClass series. He is currently studying Business Science at UCT. SubjeX’s initial offering was to help students make key Grade 10 subject choices and explore the South African educational system. Owing to the disruption of the 2020 academic year, they moved to further their mission of academic upliftment, by providing support to the Grade 12 Class of 2020 – in the form of the MasterClass Series. The MasterClass video series is available online at www.subjex.io and students throughout South Africa are encouraged to visit the site, view sample videos and sign up for full access. Money from the sale of these videos will be used to supplement Redhill School’s bursary fund, while also supporting the relevant Education Upliftment partners. For more information, visit https://subjex.io/ or on Facebook @Subjex.io and Instagram @subjex.io The Saturday Star