South African music director Kyle White has worked with well renowned musicians and producers such as Cassper Nyovest, Nasty C, Tellaman and Lady Zamar. Most recently, three of White’s music videos were selected for music video of the year at the 2020 SA Music Awards. The 33-year-old has also worked as a TV presenter, hosting e.tv’s lifestyle magazine show20Something, together with Sashi Naidoo and Namhla Ndlovu. What is the first thing you look forward to doing once lockdown is over? I look forward to travelling freely, visiting family and going to the beach. You can work under any DJ in the world. Who do you choose? I would love to shoot for so many artists, both overseas and in South Africa. It’s actually impossible to just pick one. What are your three all-time favourite movies? This is a tough one. I’d have to say Braveheart, Top Gun and Forgetting Sarah Marshall. What do you consider your best moment in your career? Being nominated for best music video of the year at the SAMAs. Which album do you currently have jamming in your car? Being a father, the range of music that is listened too is very wide. I listen to everything from the Frozen soundtrack to rock, pop and hip hop. What meal reminds you of your childhood? A simple egg on toast. When I would come home from boarding school at the weekend, my mom would always spoil me with this delicious meal. Can you tell us a little bit about the most challenging time you’ve had in your life? It would definitely have to be when my last TV show came to an end, when I was a TV presenter. I sat in limbo for many months afterwards – working at a call centre, reassessing my future. Your celebrity crush is? I don’t have one. Can you tell us a little bit about the worst date you’ve had in your life? I wanted to have a romantic dinner at home for my girlfriend. So I decided to cook a chicken over the fire. At the time, I had no idea that the protein I had chosen was by far the hardest thing to cook over an open flame. Needless to say, the dinner was a disaster, the chicken was raw but the girl is now my wife. So at least I got something right. You’ve won the R150 million lottery. What are the first three things you buy? I’d invest in property and buy the three things in this order. House #1, House #2 and House #3. The Saturday Star