John Ndlovu (not his real name) has no qualms with about selling alcohol at double or even triple the price. A pub owner in one of Joburg’s most popular townships, says now with the high risk with of selling alcohol it has to be worth it for him. “When my business partners and I decided to sell illegally, we agreed that tit had to be worth the risk. If we get caught, we can lose our liquor licence at for good. It’s difficult getting a liquor licensce as it is, but once you have it taken away, there’s zero chance of you getting it back.” Ndlovu’s pub has had a difficult timesuffered greatly during the lockdown. “Demand was huge. Many of our regular customers called us and begged us to sell to them. The lockdown caught everyone off guard. “We also decided to take advantage of the fact that our establishment is regularly frequented by metro police and law enforcement. So we figured that we won’t be arrested by our friends who drink at the pub.” Business has been booming for Ndlovu and his partners, despite the high prices. Normally, one can pay just over R300 for a bottle of Jameson whisky, but Ndlovu and his partners charge over R1 000. “People are desperate for alcohol, so they don’t flinch at the price. We had to sit down with a number of bottle store owners and ask them to sell us large quantities because we are making a lot more money than they were. “But dealing with bottle stores is risky so we have to be careful. Now we buy large amounts at a time. On our last run we bought R100 000 worth of alcohol.” Despite taking all precautions Ndlovu was caught out – once. “My colleague was arrested while transporting alcohol and taken to the police station. He was in court last month, but his case was thrown out.” The group say they have taken measures to ensure their stock is not confiscated by police. “When the police are doing their rounds, making sure licensed places don’t sell alcohol, we give stock to people in ordinary houses where cops won’t think to go.” They also supply alcohol to residents within the community who have lost their jobs and are looking for a source of income. “It has allowed us to open up entrepreneurship within the township. People who don’t have businesses or who have never sold alcohol in their lives have now become entrepreneurs.” Ndlovu says the ban on alcohol has had a devastating impact on black people dependant on the liquor industrycommunities in the country. “I do see the benefits as it is a major help to our health-care system and to the safety of people on the roads, but the people that were most affected are the black communities. "We never thought that there would ever be an alcohol ban in the country, so we had all our eggs in one basket. This is how we pay for electricity, food and insurance,” Ndlovu said. The Saturday Star