By Hlulani Mashaba Despite a progressive legal and regulatory state, women continue to face discrimination in society and the workplace, and are denied access to opportunities on the basis of class and gender. President Nelson Mandela cautioned the first democratically elected Parliament in his first State of the Nation Address (1994) that: “Freedom cannot be achieved unless women have been emancipated from all forms of oppression. Our endeavours must be about the liberation of the woman, the emancipation of the man and the liberty of the child.” His sentiments resonate well with the Women’s Month theme for this year: “Generation Equality: Realising Women’s Rights for an Equal Future.” The month of August is observed as Women’s Month and this year’s focus on advancing the women’s empowerment agenda to promote the political, social and economic empowerment of women under the banner “What Women Want”. While we observe this important milestone in the country’s calendar, one cannot overlook the role women are playing in societies, like the women of the class of 1956. Since 1994, the government has made significant strides to promote and protect women’s rights at home, in communities and various workplaces. I would be the first to acknowledge that the government is also working very hard to close gaps in gender disparities. Due to the selfless acts of many, South African women have taken their rightful place in Parliament, the government and civil society. However, we must not be fooled by any stretch of imagination that all is well when it comes to gender disparities. Women have, for a very long time, been marginalised and relegated to the lowest rungs of society. This must be a matter of concern to all of us as society. In recent times, we have seen the government increasing access of girls to education, initiating bursaries and training programmes for young women and allocating funds for female entrepreneurs. Is this enough? The answer is a simple No. Since only a handful of women enjoy these rights up to this stage. More work still needs to be done to ensure the full participation of women in the economy and women in leadership positions. More needs to be done to remove the barriers that prevent women from entering and thriving in the labour market. The promotion of gender equality and women’s empowerment must always remain central to the government’s efforts to combat poverty and stimulate sustainable development. If women are to realise their freedom, more focus must be directed towards their protection and that of their loved ones. For the freedom of women to be realised, we must all work hard to consolidate the significant milestones of female emancipation and gender equality. While it is evident that the government is working hard to address women’s issues, domestic, gender-based violence (GBV) and femicide figures remain worryingly high. With the country having seen an increase of 1.7% in sexual offences, according to the 2019/2020 crime statistics released recently by Minister of Police General Bheki Cele, there couldn’t be a better time to unite against GBV. South Africa has seen an increase of 706 cases, taking the total from 41 583 to 42 289, while sexual assault cases have also gone up from 7 437 to 7 749. It is disheartening to think that the most vicious attacks on women are usually committed by life partners or soulmates. What kind of soul-mate subjects their lover to such brutality? Time after time, individually and sometimes in groups, men are ruthlessly involved in violence against women. The Gauteng Department of Community Safety has adopted a 365-day programme to fight the scourge of GBV. One such initiative is Ikhaya Lethemba in Braamfontein and Evaton. Ikhaya Lethemba is the largest and most comprehensive one-stop centre for gender-based victims in Gauteng. The centre has assisted more than 17 000 women and children who are victims of GBV since its inception in March 2003. Ikhaya Lethemba continues to be a sanctuary to victims of GBV in the province. The centre offers multidisciplinary services to victims admitted to the shelter including therapeutic and healing services, spiritual support, skills development, medical and legal support as well as psychosocial services. We must applaud all resolute women who, amid numerous attempts to be manipulated by their abusive partners and husbands, stood their grounds and soldiered on to ensure the perpetrators faced the full might of the law. The Gauteng Department of Community Safety will continue to deepen its campaigns and efforts in dealing with the scourge of GBV during Women’s Month and beyond. We are optimistic that with the Gender-Based Violence Response Plan in place, this will assist the provincial the government in curbing the scourge going forward. A multidisciplinary response is needed to deal with the complex safety challenges facing our vulnerable group such as women and children. As the Gauteng City region, we must encourage more reporting through community mobilisation. The impact of such abuse has the potential to reverse the progress the government has made on women empowerment and eradicating poverty. For example, women bear the brunt of raising children under difficult socio-economic conditions while there is the Maintenance Act of 1998. Courts have to enforce responsibility through garnishee orders. The insensitivity, heartlessness and irresponsibility to not instinctively take care of their offspring results in children fending for themselves while mothers exhaust themselves by having to run to the courts often. Children left on their own are exposed to crime at an early age. In recent times, many young women were killed at the hands of their loved ones. The government should be applauded for taking up the fight against GBV and femicide. The setting up of Thusong Service Centres, as one-stop centres for services, is a welcome relief. Professional services are extended to women requiring help with reporting cases of GBV by facilitating engagements with the SAPS and social workers. While we continue with our programme to uplift communities by helping the most vulnerable, especially women and children, we will not be deterred in our quest to create a safe environment for our vulnerable groups until they fully realise their freedom, equality and protection. In honour of Women’s Month, we must work hard to accelerate the national agenda to eliminate poverty, improve education and access to health services, create decent jobs and reduce the disparities that continue to exist in our society. Mashaba is the assistant director: media relations, Gauteng Department of Community Safety. The Saturday Star