A South African tech company is breaking down barriers to online learning with an e-learning device that provides affordable access to curriculum-specific educational material for schools anywhere in the country. With all public schools closed across the country and with plenty of uncertainty as to when schools will be open again, many students have turned to online learning as a way of keeping up with the curriculum. However with challenges such as access to the internet and data, millions of learners across South Africa have been denied online learning. Local tech company Jendamark Automation have however come up with a solution. The company, based in Port Elizabeth, has developed an e-learning device that provides affordable access to curriculum-specific educational material for schools across the country. The e-learning solution is beneficial for rural  and lower quintile schools in particular, and was developed by Jendamark as part of its Odin Education software ecosystem. Roll-out of the devices began at the end of June, with over 600 deployed across rural Free State schools, and 75 to Grade 12 learners from various Nelson Mandela Bay schools who are enrolled in the Unity in Africa Foundation’s ‘Incubating Great Engineering Minds’ (iGEMS) after- school programme. Jendamark also donated a further 114 devices to Grade 11 pupils at Nqweba Secondary School in Graaff-Reinet.The android educational tablet, known as Omang – meaning ‘identity’ in Sesotho, is loaded with content drawn from the country’s major educational publishers, with free data supplied by leading network providers. Content is specific to each school’s curriculum requirements – including its chosen textbooks per grade, approved educational websites, and any e-learning platforms or apps it may already be using. “The Omang device provides a 'one-stop' solution for e-learning at a truly affordable cost,’ said head of Odin Education, Ajit Gopalakrishnan. “It includes aspects required for e-learning such as device, connectivity, content management platform, security, control.” “The device itself is a 7-inch tablet, personalised for every learner, which means it is pre-loaded with that specific learner’s subject textbooks (as chosen by their school), and all the relevant educational websites and resources, such as educational apps, past exam papers, notes, and video tutorials they need, plus 2GB of data every month.” “Functionalities such as multiple-choice tests and teacher-led chats help the learner to engage with the content and ask for assistance.” The device is also simple to use , and can only be used for educational purposes, with safe, approved, websites and teacher-led chats. “It is a fully integrated and dedicated e-learning device that is configured as 'On and Play'. Which basically means the moment you switch it on it is fully personalised for you, with your subject textbooks, videos and web platforms all configured for you,’ said Gopalakrishnan. “Our support team prepares every device and can upload additional learning material on behalf of the teacher and also adds bonus content based on what the learner shows interest in and searches for.” “The Omang device provides all the necessary technology infrastructure and data for full remote learning and teaching. Teachers can upload all their notes and video lessons and extra content from wherever they are and push them to learners.” Gopalakrishnan said the company developed the Omang tablet as they had noticed a great need for digital learning particularly among students from rural or lower quintile schools. “We believe that as long as we can give each child in SA a digital identity we can empower them to make something of themselves through access to the latest in edtech that is available.” “It’s about connecting them to the world through technology and access to information and knowledge.” “Many of the children in these rural or lower quintile  schools do not have laptops or smartphones for learning at home and their parents cannot afford data.” “Many of the lower quintile schools also do not have functional computer labs or libraries, so these dedicated educational devices put free access to all of these resources in a child’s hands.” “Our aim was to make a solution that works in any learning environment. We believe we have achieved that, by demonstrating its effectiveness even in the most remote and disadvantaged schools in the country.” The total cost of the device, with all applications, textbooks, and educational resources pre-loaded, plus full tech support and 2GB of data per month, costs R134 per learner per month for a two-year period, said Gopalakrishnan. “The device is available for purchase by any school, corporate sponsor or provincial education department and can be tailored to any grade. And even for TVET colleges and tertiary education.” The device has been launched at a time where there is a great need for digital education. Gopalakrishnan believes students will greatly benefit from the Omang during lockdown. “The need for a transformation in education has been there well before the virus arrived.” “We believe that what the coronavirus has done is together truly look at what needs to change in education along with coping with the challenges posed by the virus.” “But we also see Omang as an e-learning solution beyond Covid-19, a way to get our children used to digital technology as part of their daily life and give them a way to connect with the world. We need to equip our kids with the technologies that will enable them to live and work competitively within the modern world of the 4th Industrial Revolution.” He says devices such as the  Omang have the power to revolutionise the way students learn. “We truly believe that if we can scale this solution it indeed will revolutionise what education means in SA.” “This is not because of what we do alone, it is because our main goal is to create a digital infrastructure that connects the best edtech technology available out there with the schools and learners in our country in a controlled and safe ecosystem.” “This device can be used for educational purposes only, so it is a safer, more secure option. The Omang will also assist students in catching up with work they have missed out on during the disrupted period. “The device empowers learners to use the platforms available to drive their own learning.” “The technology will certainly not close the gap for the learners, but what it does is give the learner the tools with which they can do so themselves.” “ We believe the Omang device can provide continuity of learning and remote teaching, despite the opening and closing of schools.” Those students who have already begun using the Omang tablet say it’s proved to be beneficial to their learning. Sibonisiwe Cakwebe, a grade 12 pupil at Newton Technical High School in Port Elizabeth says the Omang has helped her greatly. “Having the tablet with me has truly been the best thing ever for me,” said Cakwebe. “Data used to be my problem as I couldn't download the study guides and textbooks that I wanted but now I can.” “This has helped me a lot by getting extra work, books and others. This also helps me understand the work that maybe I didn’t understand well at school.” “Online is very important. Especially in the times we are living in. The only time we can get work is by online learning so the future is online learning.’ Grade 12 learner Xhanti Qandana agrees. “We are excited. This is huge for us, as we come from very underprivileged homes. This device will enable us to function better, as everything we need is at our disposal. It’s like having a second teacher.” Thandokazi Kanana, a grade 12 pupil at Ethembeni High School says the device has been crucial to her getting ahead of her work after missing out on lost time while schools have been closed. “It’s very beneficial to have everything I need academically at my disposal,” said Kanana. “It has helped me in getting more information on what I was not clear on in the classroom. Online learning is important to make sure that students stay up to date during this pandemic, it is also important in allowing students to interact with each other while staying safe.” The pre-loaded devices can be purchased by schools or provincial education departments at a monthly cost of R134 per learner. For more information, visit Odin Education’s website. The Saturday Star