Covid-19 threatens conservation efforts in Africa with a “perfect storm” of reduced funding, restrictions on the operations of conservation agencies, and elevated human threats to nature. Wildlife conservation arguably faces the most serious challenge in decades, argue a team of authors of a new paper, Conserving Africa’s Wildlife and Wildlands through the Covid-19 Crisis and Beyond, published in the journal Nature Ecology and Evolution, threatening to undo decades of progress. Africa’s economy could suffer from reductions in foreign investment, reduced inflows of remittances and foreign aid, and lower overall earnings. “GDP may contract by 4%, and governments face reduced tax revenues and devalued currencies, resulting in severe budget deficits and knock-on effects on African livelihoods. Lockdown restrictions and economic turmoil could also compromise conservation of Africa’s immensely valuable wildlife and wild-lands, and the people who benefit from them.” The continent has nearly 2000 Key Biodiversity Areas and supports the world’s most diverse and abundant large mammal populations with wildlife-based tourism, generating over $29 billion (R492.5 billion) annually and employs 3.6 million people. Trophy hunting generates an estimated $217m annually over more than 1 million square kilometres. “Tourism helps governments justify protecting wildlife habitat. It creates revenue for state wildlife authorities, generates foreign exchange earnings, diversifies and strengthens local economies and contributes to food security and poverty alleviation.” Africa’s wildlife attracts considerable foreign investment via funding for conservation efforts. The backbone of African conservation efforts is made up of 7 800 terrestrial protected areas, covering 5.3 million square kilometres – around 17% of the continent’s land area. Despite impressive political commitment to conservation, the continent suffers “severe and persistent” funding shortages hindering management effectiveness. Key threats include habitat loss, degradation, fragmentation, encroachment, poaching and climate change. “These factors, combined with poor governance, poverty, increasing human populations and illegal wildlife trade, continue to drive wildlife declines across the continent. With few localised exceptions, African conservation was in crisis even before Covid-19 hit. The pandemic could amplify the crisis to catastrophic effect. “Governments face severe budget crisis driven by the economic fallout of the pandemic and the cost of relief measures. Shortages will compel policymakers to cut anything perceived as non-essential. “African wildlife authority budgets, already grossly inadequate, risk being slashed further jeopardising wildlife and wild-lands.” Compounding these effects is the continent-wide collapse of wildlife based tourism due to travel restrictions and traveller concerns, with the effects “unprecedented in scale and severity”. Around 90% of African tour operators have experienced more than 75% declines in bookings. Decreasing tourism revenue threatens millions of jobs and peripheral industries, severely impacting the livelihoods of some of the continent’s poorest people. The researchers expect reduced donor funding for African conservation over the next one to two years due to flagging economies and shifting priorities. The pandemic will shift focus from conservation towards humanitarian causes. The crisis demands a concerted effort, ensuring “more resilient” conservation models benefit humans and wildlife.“ The Saturday Star