By Kevin Ritchie The sale of alcohol remains banned – as is the sale of tobacco – but for those with a thirst and deep enough pockets, the prohibition is an inconvenience, nothing more. The alcohol ban was supposed to relieve the pressure on hospitals ahead of the projected surge of COVID 19 patients. An ancillary benefit was supposed to be a drop in road carnage and a lessening of our gender-based violence – even though night time curfews are in place in the midst of the greatest ever peacetime deployment of the South African National Defence Force. Did they? On the face of it, no. Instead this prolonged prohibition, ostensibly to aid in the fight against the epidemiological contagion, helped propel the economic contagion, with the news this week of three major players: brewers AB InBev and Heineken and glass makers Consol shelving multi-billion rand capital investment projects  as a direct result of lost revenue over the last 135 days. South Africa is already estimated to have a formal unemployment rate of 50 percent amid the steady litany of restaurants and hostelries, smaller brewers, distillers and winemakers announcing their final closure, unable to continue the unequal battle of trying to remain competitive with regulations that make no sense for their business. The problem is those very same regulations don’t make much sense in the effective combatting of the Coronavirus pandemic, since anti-social behaviour and bad driving practices – with their concomitant strain upon our already dysfunctional national health system – predate the advent of the virus and have gone largely unremarked until now. What we have instead is living proof of Winston Churchill’s pithy observation: “if you have 10 000 regulations, you destroy all respect for the law”. All of us have been witnessing that ourselves over the last couple of months – some of us have even become those outlaws. Let’s protect lives and livelihoods while we still can. End this capricious ban. The Saturday Star