Men were born from women, some have female partners as well as sisters and daughters and for these simple reasons, they should take a stand against Gender Based Violence (GBV). These were the thoughts of Lyle Ryan, the CEO of LRI Productions who is spearheading an all male line-up at a concert dedicated to women. “More men should take a stand against GBV,” he insisted. “Would a father allow another man to hit his daughter?” “My dad who is 72-years-old will always open the door of a car for a lady and allow a lady to walk first.” ‘The Showcase Vol 4’ concert is an initiative where some of the country’s leading male musicians will unite this Women’s Month to celebrate the women of South Africa. Artists such as The Black Ties (Keeno-Lee Hector, Chad Saaiman and Lloyd Jansen), rapper Early B, Chad Chitter (MC and DJ), Sean De Vries (backing band) as well as the soulful crooner Tye Platinum, will all perform in a once off Women’s Month virtual concert celebration on August 28. Some of the musical performances are curated specifically for Women’s Month with a sense of romance and fun being key themes. Ryan said fans can also expect covers of acclaimed hits as well as some original music too. The proceeds of the musical extravaganza will be donated to non-profit organisation, Heaven’s Shelter House in Mitchells Plain, near Cape Town. The charity provides a home for abandoned and abused women and children and also helps them find employment. Ryan, whose LRI Productions will host the concert which has been forced to go digital as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, is excited at what the funds raised from the musical offering can do for Heaven’s Shelter House. “We are excited to help repainting the building, fix the plumbing and electrical works and sort out the water leakages near the electrical supply box, furniture shortages and the repair of its roof.” He added that this shelter for women and children is unique because it was started by a  pastor who opened her own house for strangers in need. “What a woman!” “This shelter really makes a difference in women's lives hence me wanting to help.” The CEO explained that it was important for the line-up to be male centred as these artists can serve as role models for their fellow men of South Africa. “I think it so important for us as men to celebrate women this month because if it was not for a woman, we all would not be here.” He added that the male musicians who will add their voice to the concert all share the same sentiment when it comes to protecting and celebrating women. Ryan explained that this project was particularly close to two of these musicians' hearts as they were raised by single mothers. While there are a variety of initiatives this Women’s Month which aim to fight GBV, Ryan believes that music can reach people in a special and intense way. “Music, because of its deep connections with the brain, is intrinsically meaningful to humanity as a race. We thrive off it. It drives our actions and emotions, and its influence on our brains creates a sense of unity with music that few other art forms can provide.” Tickets for ‘The Showcase Vol 4’ cost R100 each and can be purchased via www.quicket.co.za The Saturday Star