Former South African footballer Sean Dundee has played for European giants such as Liverpool FC and VfB Stuttgart. The former striker enjoyed his best spell of European football at German club Stuttgart where he appeared 77 times and scored 25 goals. He made three appearances for Liverpool FC, playing under managers Gerard Houllier and Roy Evans. Dundee also played for the Germany national B team, making one appearance in 2000. You are able to roll back the years and get back on the pitch as a footballer. Which manager would you most love playing under and why? Back then, it would have to have been Franz Beckenbauer. Right now, it would definitely be Jurgen Klopp. Many people don’t know that my first roommate in Germany was Thomas Tuchel. How would you sum up your time as a footballer at Liverpool FC? Not very good. I had a bad start and then had my worst injury there. When the new coach took over, my time was over... I should have worked harder but I’m grateful that I was there. You are given the task of coming up with your ultimate five-a-side team. Which five present players do you choose? Manuel Neuer Virgil Van Dijk Alphonso Davies Serge Gnabry Lionel Messi What’s the biggest misconception people have of Sean Dundee? Nobody knows who I really am until they talk to me... My parents and my old coach at Stuttgart used to call me every night because they thought I would be out partying, but I took my job seriously... It’s a perception a lot of others had of me too... I love being at home, back then even more than now. The proudest moment of your life so far? Growing up in South Africa and making it to the Bundesliga... South Africa has so much talent, I’d love to see more here. The best and worst thing about being a footballer was...? The best scoring goals of course…The worst is losing, nobody likes to lose. The best football stadium you have ever played in was...? Liverpool’s Anfield and Borussia Dortmunds Westfalen stadiums. If you could change anything from the past what would it be and why? I wish I could have worked harder and set more goals in my career. Your celebrity crush growing up was...? I loved football too much to worry about that. I wanted to make it as a pro footballer. Who would you consider the toughest footballer you’ve ever come up against? Jürgen Köhler, the 1990 World Cup winner. Kohler also played for Juventus, Borussia Dortmund and Bayern Munich. The Saturday Star