By Staff Reporter While Covid-19 infections might have been decreasing steadily over the past few weeks, there are still scores of South Africans in need of a helping hand. Kindred, an online shopping platform based in the UK, has heeded the call and are determined to help the nation’s most vulnerable youngsters during the pandemic. They have partnered with non-profit charity Community Chest to sell these proudly South African ‘Rainbow Heart’ t-shirts. The proceeds from these t-shirts which represent the nation and displays all the colours of the South African flag, will go toward aid for students and learners in need as part of the ‘Coalition of the Committed’ project. The mobile app’s head of onboarding and support, Yaz Samaai explained that they are using consumer power to make a difference in children’s lives with Kindred already having successfully raised money for charities in the UK, USA, Italy and Turkey. “We hope to raise funds for learners and students to be self-sufficient outside of the classroom during these challenging times,” he said. The t-shirts come in white and come in a variety of sizes with prices ranging from R159-R189 for both kids and adults. The campaign also aims to empower local companies during these unprecedented times as all ‘Rainbow Heart’ t-shirts are locally manufactured. Order yours today at https://www.bekindbestrongersa.com/ , our e- commerce platform or via the Kindred app to show your support. Be Kind. Be Stronger. Be Kindred. Meanwhile, Community Chest public relations official Desiré Goliath added that they were excited to be a part of this worthy cause. “Kindred as a partner in change is a natural fit as we both deal in hope. Our strategic area of education has been a key focus during the lockdown, as it has been directly and severely impacted.” Goliath said that Community Chest have been busy providing assistance to those in need during the lockdown. “Apart from our efforts in food relief, we have embarked on education campaigns and ploughed resources into remote learning and the back-to-school reintegration process. Together we will come through this pandemic stronger.” The Saturday Star