Johannesburg - Politician John Steenhuisen has been serving as the leader of the opposition in the National Assembly since October 2019 and the interim Federal leader of the Democratic Alliance since November 2019. The 44-year-old previously served as the Chief Whip of the official opposition under the leadership of Mmusi Maimane and has been serving as a member of the National Assembly since July 2011. Before he was appointed to Parliament, he was active in the provincial politics of KwaZulu-Natal, serving as both the provincial leader of the DA and the leader of the party’s caucus in the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature. You are invited for a celebrity boxing match. You are able to go 12 rounds with any politician in South Africa. Who do you choose and why? Ace Magashule, because his boss is too afraid to take him on, I will do it for him. What is the biggest misconception people have of John Steenhuisen? That I don’t like Flo Letoaba.- After our last interview, I think she’s very talented. You have the choice to either go to an Eminem or Justin Bieber concert. Which one do you choose ? Bieber- – My daughters wouldn’t forgive me, otherwise! What in the best and worst thing about being a politician in South Africa is.....? The best thing is being able to get out of bed every day and try and make a difference to improve the lives of our citizens. The worst thing is having to read the poor quality of political analysis from the commentariat. You could sit down with any world leader for a two hour chat. Which leader do you choose and why? Cyril Ramaphosa-. It would be nice to get some real answers for a change! The meal that most reminds you of your childhood is.......? Spaghetti Bolognese What is your biggest regret? Not finishing my degree, it clearly keeps poor Ndlozi awake at night! You have been elected the President of South Africa. What is your main priority as President? 1. Jobs, 2. Jobs 3. Jobs What is the If there is one thing that the lockdown has taught  you? That South Africans reveal their very best when they are under pressure. Lockdown has brought out the best in so many South Africans, just a pity that it also showed their politicians at their worst. A well known bar in South Africa is creating a cocktail in honour of you.  What are the main ingredients that go into the cocktail? And what do you name the cocktail? Gin, Vodka, Bacardi and Lime- – its called the “Sharrup Steenhuisen!” Guaranteed to make you lose your voice! The Saturday Star