In this week's A-Typical interview we feature Miss South Africa Sasha-Lee Olivier. The 26-year-old beauty queen was unveiled as the new Miss South Africa last week, after title holder Zozibini Tunzi won the Miss Universe last month. She became popular as one of the 'first plus-sized contestants' to take part in the Miss SA pageant. What's the worst date you have had in your life? I’ve never really had a bad dating experience .  I think the most embarrassing thing that's ever happened to me in that situation is when I wore a jersey inside out and back to front and my date never said a word. The only time I noticed my jersey was the wrong way around is when I got home. What has captured your attention on social media this week? It’s definitely been the incident at Parktown Boys. I think it's imperative that in any situation where our kids are at school, that they are kept safe . I think it's a very unfortunate instance for this family to be in and our prayers are with them. What is your go to food when you are in need of cheering up? Definitely pizza. But I’m not going to lie and say I only eat pizza when I am in need of cheering up. I eat it all the time. But that is definitely my go to food. Anything full of cheese. You are on a dating site. What three things do your potential dates need to know about you? I never considered putting myself on a dating site. But if I had to put three things in my bio, the first thing would be that  I love art. I hope my partner is someone who is well cultured and knows that I'm into a multitude of things. I have a vast array of interests and art would be one of those things. I actually really love pizza, so our date nights would consist of a lot of pizza and if ever he did something wrong I think pizza is a good way to start getting into my good books again. Food can solve a few problems so pizza is a good way to go. Third thing, I love vintage video games. I probably would beat him, but that's okay . I would never go easy on him because I'm really good at it. He must be well aware that I'm very competitive in that regard.  What's your all time favourite board game and why? My all time favorite board game is something I haven't actually played before but I just know its a game that is made for me.Its called What Do You MEME.  I haven't played it before, but I love memes, it's one of my guilty pleasures so What Do You MEME would be one of my favs. If you could change anything about yourself, what would it be and why? I wouldn't really change anything about myself. I think I've grown to be very comfortable with who I am and confident with who I am as a person. What is one thing that people don't know about Sasha-Lee Olivier? The one thing that people don't know about me is that I really like vintage video games. I actually went as far as winning a league once. So it's something I actually continue to play now, so I still love it very much. What was your most embarrassing moment in high school? I never had one in high school. I did have one in primary school though. We went on a trip to a fire station and I got locked in one of the bathrooms. It was a very embarrassing moment for me. I didn't really know what to do and I was really short and  couldn't reach the top of the door, so I ended up sitting there for quite a while, it was very embarrassing. If someone asked to be your apprentice and learn all that you know, what would you teach them? I’d teach them to leverage whatever it is they know and to create opportunities for themselves.. I think it's a good thing to learn from others but it's even better when you get to a place where you understand what your strengths are and get to a place where you can capitalise on that. That's definitely something that the economy of sa needs right now, more entrepreneurs. So my focus would solely be on that, getting them to a place where they understand what iti s they can capitalise on. If you could use a time machine to go back into your past and fix one thing, what would it be and how would it change your future? We all wish that it was easier, we all wish that we had less challenges that we had to face . But it would be ignorant for us to say that both the good and bad haven't shaped who we are, so I wouldn't change anything. The Saturday Star