In this week’s A-typical interview, we feature South African actress Kate Liquorish. The 35-year-old actress’s stage work has garnered her multiple award nominations including best actress and best supporting actress at the prestigious Fleur du Cap Theatre Awards. Her screen work includes starring opposite Laurence Fishburne, Orlando Jones and David Harewood in BET's series Madiba in which she played the political activist Ruth First. She also starred opposite Helen Mirren in Gavin Hood's Eye in the Sky , as well as  Pearl Thusi and Akin Omotoso in Kagiso Lediga's film Catching Feelings. This year has seen her star alongside Pearl Thusi in Africa's first Netflix Original Queen Sono which was released globally in February, as well as in the lead role of DStv's much-anticipated drama Still Breathing. You are given the option of starring alongside either Matt Damon or Leonardo DiCaprio in a Hollywood blockbuster. Who do you choose? Leonardo DiCaprio. He's an actor who goes deeper, who works far beyond what's on the page, but let's be honest, I'd be absolutely over the moon for a film with either of them. Your favourite restaurant in South Africa? And what do you normally order at your favourite restaurant? It changes, but at the moment it's the rooftop at Hallmark House. The view is unlike anything you've been exposed to in a restaurant, a 360-degree view over the whole of Joburg City. It's magical. There's only one thing to order: the aged sirloin steak, beef jus, chimichurri and most delicious triple fried wedges you've ever tasted! Your most challenging role as an actress? Ekaterina Gromova in Queen Sono, to learn Russian and to learn to fight in just six weeks was the most intense thing I've had to do. It broke me. But, it was worth it and I was really proud and happy with the result. I would do it all over again. You are stuck on an island with your fellow cast members of Still Breathing. You have to split into teams of two in order to gather food and survive. Which cast member do you choose to team up with and why? Lorcia Cooper-Khumalo. She is a ray of sunshine, her outlook on life is so beautiful and so genuinely positive and I just can't get enough of her. Plus she's super fit and super chilled, so I reckon she'd be the perfect partner, because I can be highly strung and she'd chill me out. We'd gather food and make a little camp on the beach. I'd cook for us ,and we'd talk and laugh and have the best time. James Cameron or Steven Spielberg? Steven Spielberg. Both are big in terms of blockbusters, but Spielberg's films have more heart: The Colour Purple, Schindler's List, The Terminal, Catch Me If You Can… The biggest misconception people have of Kate Liquorish? I have no idea. Perhaps people think I'm quite serious because I can be on set, but I'm actually quite goofy and I love playing the fool, playing pranks, giving people scares… It's my favourite! The one thing your fans don't know about you? You tell me! Honestly, I'm an open book (to my detriment). Maybe that I took Zulu for matric instead of Afrikaans, so I can speak Zulu (not terribly well, but I am getting back into it. What caught your attention on social media in the past week? I try to stay away from social media as much as possible these days, to keep me sane – I'm trying to figure out reels and I feel like a geriatric. I catch my news in small doses on the radio and then I get the lowdown of celeb gossip on set, and everyone laughs at me because I'm so out of the loop. You are able to shoot a movie in any location in the world. Which location do you choose and why? A beach destination, definitely. Perhaps Indonesia as it has beautiful beaches and amazing food and I've never been there before. Your three current favourite TV series? The Undoing, The Queen's Gambit and Love Life. The Saturday Star