Staff Reporter When life gives you lemons, make lemonaid. This certainly cannot be more true for the matric class of 2020 with news from the Department of Basic Education (DBE) that two leaked exam papers will have to be rewritten. The matric rewrite will be considered in court today after a postponement yesterday morning. DBE defended its decision to ask matriculants to rewrite the two leaked exam papers. Several organisations, including Afriforum and teacher union, SADTU, are against the decision, claiming that it's not justified but the Department is adamant the rewrites are necessary for protecting the integrity of the National Senior Certificate. One person was been arrested for links to the leaked papers. But help has arrived for some learners who are busy preparing for their rewrites. Redhill School in Johannesburg is providing free access to its online Grade 12 MasterClass videos for both Maths and Physical Science in the lead-up to the rewrites. Redhill principal, Joseph Gerassi, said he would continue  to hone his student-focused, innovative approach to education while acknowledging the immense demands and burdens placed on the Grade 12 class of 2020. According to the DBE’s ruling, Maths Paper 2 will be rewritten on December 15, while Physical Science Paper 2 will be rewritten on December 17. Students who wish to recap these subjects ahead of these dates can register online at subjex.io, where they will have access to the MasterClass videos at no cost. The MasterClasses, powered by SubjeX were launched earlier this year in partnership between SubjeX and Redhill School. It offers a series of comprehensive, subject-specific Grade 12 revision videos presented by  expert academics and made available online to students throughout South Africa via subjex.io. The MasterClasses were launched in response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the 2020 Grade 12 year in South Africa, with the aim of providing Grade 12 pupils with access to academic material expressly created and expertly presented to enable them to achieve the best possible results in their final Grade 12 exams. Redhill prides itself on its “illustrious” 115-year history and delivers innovative education based on creative and critical thinking. “This culture is underpinned by a holistic approach to the development of the mind and it consistently produces the desired outcome - unique academic excellence. Redhill is at the forefront of preparing young individuals to produce positive change in their world,” said Gerassi. SubjeX is an EdTech business founded in 2017 by students Max Coleman and Jack Scott-King, with the objective of providing students with a single platform to access relevant academic information. SubjeX’s initial offering was to help students make key Grade 9 subject choices and further explore the South African educational system. “Owing to the disruption of the 2020 academic year, we deemed it appropriate to further our mission of academic upliftment by providing support to the Grade 12 Class of 2020 - in the form of the MasterClass Series,”said founders, Max Coleman and Jack Scott-King. The Saturday Star