Staff Reporter Getting active and staying active, especially during the festive season, can be difficult for many people. With a busy social calendar and delicious festive treats at every turn, a one's fitness, in particular, often takes a back seat, to indulge in sweet and savoury treats over Christmas. With this in mind, the Saturday Star has teamed up with lifestyle outlet West Pack and several leading fitness and lifestyle South African influencers to launch the 12 Days Fit Christmas Campaign. The campaign, which was launched this week, encourages people to have fun and keep fit and healthy, while showcasing that there’s something available for everyone from West Pack this festive season. Each of the influencers were given a surprise West Pack gift hamper, which included items such as inflatable pool accessories, fun balls and jumping castles, storage and home ware products. The  challenge was simple: using the items, they need to get their creative juices flowing and come up with a fun exercise workout demonstrating how you can still have fun while keeping fit this Christmas with some items you may have readily available in your home. Each day, over the next twelve days until December 24, readers can look forward to some exciting content from each of the influencers who include the likes of Survivor SA star finalist, Steffi Brink, Binnelanders actor, Clint Brink, 2020 Biogen Face of Fitness finalist, Tertia Dippenaar, Editor and Mommy blogger, Adele Koolen and Instagram’s Fit Like Mummy, Natasha Kisten. Fitness Model, Fair Gomwe, NLP  practitioner, Buhle K Maluleke, former Argentinian pro-footballer and Functional Fitness Expert, Nick Gindre, Mama is Me parenting blogger, Teixeira Murray, Owner of Fit by KL, Nina Lambrakis, yoga instructor, Paige Cassidy and SA hurdles champion, Rickenette Steenkamp. The content will be available on the Saturday Star as well as West Pack’s social media sites including Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. There will also be some exciting fitness tips on how to keep in shape during the festive period in this weekend’s Saturday Star. Follow the #12DaysFitChristmas campaign on West Pack Lifestyle’s official social media channels, Instagram, Facebook, Twitter and YouTube. Instagram – @westpackstores Facebook – @westpacklifestyle Twitter – @westpackstores YouTube – West Pack Lifestyle We’d love for you to engage with us and join in on the fun by showing us how you keep fit over this festive season. Mention us in your stories using the hashtags: #12DaysFit Christmas #WestPackLifestyle #WestPackFestive #WestPackChristmas For more information visit www.westpacklifestle.co.za