Whether you are travelling this festive season or enjoying some much deserved leisurely time at home, here are some tips to keep you and your loved ones safe. Covid-19 in SA As the country is currently in its second peak of coronavirus infections, health authorities have pleaded with the nation to do all they can to keep safe. How to stay Covid-19 free: *Wash your hands regularly, sanitise, practise social distancing and wear a face mask. *Clean frequently touched surfaces regularly. *Keep social gatherings to immediate family or as small as you can. *Congregate outdoors or in well-ventilated rooms. *Avoid crowded areas such as malls, beaches, restaurants and other entertainment venues. *Spend time outdoors and get some Vitamin D Sexual abuse tips for parents and children. The Teddy Bear Foundation, a non-profit organisation that assists abused children, has offered the following advice: *Parents should be as calm as possible when discussing “stranger danger.” *Teach children not to help strangers look for lost puppies or muti or medicine for someone ill. They shouldn’t accept gifts or sweets or get in a car with someone they don't know. *Children should not use a taxi or Uber or public transport without adult supervision. *Sleepovers must be supervised. Provide the children with contact details of trusted support they can approach if they require assistance. *Be wary of any adult that pays too much attention to your child. *Children should not be sent alone to shops or through deserted areas. Never lose sight of your child in a shopping mall. *Children should not take open drinks or sweets from anyone as this can be laced with drugs. *No child must be photographed by a stranger. These images can be photo-shopped and used for child pornography on the internet. *Parents should know who their children contact on the Internet. *If your child goes missing, call the police immediately - the first hour is critical. Important Contact Details SA Police Service: 10111 Childline: 08000 55555 Domestic Abuse Helpline: 0800 428 428 Lifeline: 0861 322 322 How to be safe on the road this festive season One thousand six hundred people died on the road between December 1, 2019 and January 15, 2020. Insurers Dialdirect has compiled a list of tips to avoid becoming a statistic. Checklist: Before you start driving, check your vehicle’s lights and electrical system, windows and wipers, wheels and tyres, brakes, suspension, battery, belts and chains. You should also check if your vehicle’s cooling system, filters and fluids, exhaust system, body panels, mountings and accessories, safety and warning equipment and child seats are in order. Good driving practice: Keep a safe following distance. Stick to the speed limit. Avoid tailgating and sudden, erratic movements. Minimise lane changes, signal early and accelerate and brake gradually. If you need to overtake, do it only once it’s legal and safe. Accommodate other drivers. Fatigue: Get at least seven hours sleep before a long-distance trip, and avoid driving between 2am and 6am. Plan breaks into your trip and don’t drive when tired. Distractions: Don’t be distracted. Even hands-free solutions divide your attention. Be on the lookout for bikers and heavy vehicles. If you’re behind a truck and you can’t see its mirrors, then the driver can’t see you. If your car breaks down: Switch on your hazard lights and, if possible, pull into the emergency lane. Make sure your vehicle remains visible – make use of your emergency triangle. If you get stuck in a dangerous spot, get out of your vehicle when it is safe to do so and walk carefully to the side of the road. Ideally, you should remain in your car with the doors locked. Immediately call your insurer for assistance. Driving under the influence: SA’s legal limit is a blood alcohol level of 0.05g per 100ml.  As a general rule, 2 drinks in one hour will put you over the limit. Hijacking: Use a GPS to avoid getting lost and becoming an easy target. Inform someone at your destination about your estimated time of arrival. Avoid driving with windows wide open. Keep the doors locked and valuables out of sight. If you suspect you are being followed, make a couple of false turns. If someone is still following you, drive to the nearest police station. Leave enough room between you and the car in front of you to avoid being boxed in. Slow down in such a way that the traffic light is green by the time you reach it. Always park in a safe, well-lit area. If you are hijacked: Remain calm, don’t argue and don’t make sudden gestures. Don’t be a hero. Your life is worth more than your car. Smash and grabs and vehicle theft: Lock your car at all times. Never leave house keys or important documents in your car. Install a good alarm system, gear lock, steering wheel lock and immobiliser. Street intersections, stop signs or driveways are regarded as smash and grab hot spots. Have poly carb film fitted to your windows. This is tinted so that potential thieves cannot see into your car. The film makes it extremely difficult to shatter your windows and it also reduces glare. The following guide will ensure you and your possessions stay safe while at home and on holiday. At home: Fit access doors with security gates and install burglar bars on windows. Install electric perimeter fencing. Notify your security company when you won’t be at home. Store irreplaceable, sentimental items in a safe. Lights that are always on and newspapers bulging from your post box send a clear message you’re not home. Install a timer for lights so that they only switch on at night. Ask a neighbour to collect your mail. While on holiday: Shop and explore with caution. Try to avoid ATMs and shops in quiet and remote areas. Have important contact numbers closeby, for example the local police or  EMS provider. Mall robberies: Stay alert and limit distractions. Avoid high-target stores around opening and closing times. Decide how and where you and your friends or family will meet in the event of a robbery – you may not have your cell phone. Don’t confront anyone – robbers are likely to be armed. Should robbers demand personal items, hand them over immediately. Stay calm and try and help others to do the same. How to avoid debt this festive season The festive season is notorious for splurging cash. MiWay Insurance has put together some handy tips to keep your festive finances in check: Decrease your debt Beat the budgeting blues by cutting back and developing clear outcomes. Prioritise paying off as much debt as you can each month. If you’re lucky enough to get an annual bonus or a 13th cheque, pay off your loans or make an investment. Curb holiday spending Revise your budget to accommodate extra expenses rather than writing December off as ’one of those things’. Arrange for each person to buy just one present rather than a wide array of costly gifts. Say no to credit In the run-up to Christmas, there are plenty of enticing credit and “no deposit” deals that can tempt you into splashing out on expensive gifts you can’t really afford. But in the long run, credit leaves you with a higher price to pay and costs you more in interest repayments over the longer term. Rather say no to credit and stick to items you can afford.  Carry cash. Counting every cent makes you think twice about spending impulsively. Draw out your weekly budget from the ATM to avoid excessive spending. The Saturday Star