Whether you are going on holiday or staying at home this festive season, there is no doubt you need a distraction from this challenging and unprecedented year exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic. Local author Jonti Mayer agrees and believes that his new book ‘Conscious Manifestation - Master your life and your business from the inside out,’ can not only serve as an escape from reality but can also help people improve their lives as they enter a new year. “It has been such a tough year for people and ‘Conscious Manifestation’ seeks to re-empower people from the inside out, giving them the insight, inspiration and tools to get what they want in spite of having the odds of circumstances stacked against them,” he told The Saturday Star this week. While Mayer might be new to the publishing industry, he has found widespread success in both his private life and the business world. As a “self-confessed liberator of people from all that constrains them,’ he has over 20 years of experience in corporate coaching and consulting in South Africa and he has been instrumental in empowering leaders to take themselves, their teams, and their organisations to the next level. Mayer recently decided to combine his own personal journey together with the wisdom, experience and insight he has gleaned from all over the globe and combine this with revolutionary methodologies to produce his debut book. While the book is centred around manifestation, the process of taking an idea or desire from the mental or ethereal realm and converting it into a physical, tangible result and is similar to many others of its kinds such as ‘The Secret,’ Mayer insists that ‘Conscious Manifestation’ offers readers a brand new perspective on life. “It is inspirational, deep and practical and the wisdom is so multifaceted and multidimensional that can be applied in various circumstances; from someone wanting to date and mate, to someone wanting to build and grow their business to someone who wants to pursue an impossible dream.” Mayer’s unique path as an author has also meant that his book, while similar to others in regards to the laws of attraction, is based on different methodologies. “As a business coach, I don’t subscribe to the fact that you can just think yourself rich or thin, or happy and I don’t believe that the inner world alone will enable people to get what they want. “‘You need to have structures in the physical world, and in my opinion what was missing was the phenomenon of context. “All manifestation happens in a context and if you don’t have the appropriate context you won’t get it, no matter how much you visualise and envision or chant. It’s not going to happen.” Mayer explained that he has had a life-long love affair with the concepts of manifestation and transformation. His intrigue with the topic even took him to Jerusalem where he studied with some of the world’s most powerful Kabbalists for a decade. He then returned to South Africa where he conveyed his newfound skills and knowledge with the local business world and has now opted to share it with people from all walks of life. He believes that his book will be a success because he has already used the principles he learnt abroad to better himself as well as those in the corporate world. “I have manifested a business, and for the most part, I consider myself somebody who gets what I want,” he said. “I have also assisted many people to achieve their goals and dreams in their personal and business life.” The evidence of Mayer helping others achieve their dreams is evident in his book as he explains in ‘Conscious Manifestation’ that a business approached him when they were on the brink of collapse. But after committing to manifestation, they succeeded in not only turning their enterprise around, but they also managed to secure a million-dollar deal. “Through conscious manifestation, I have taken another business from a R200m per year to R1.2bn per year business,” he said. Mayer insists that it's not only corporates that can benefit from his ideals and he believes that every single individual, no matter their circumstances, possesses their ability to transform their own lives. “At some level, we’re all manifestors and every human being is capable of taking a desire, want or need, and converting that impulse into a tangible reality. “The world is full of people who are manifesting, from the smallest to the biggest manifestation.” Mayer said that this process is similar for all people and that in his book, he attempts to map the process for accelerated and deliberate manifestation. “If you think about it, the simplest act of getting a cup of coffee will require manifestation – buy the coffee, get up off your chair, money, coffee beans, hot water, sugar, milk. “There’s a process of manifestation you embrace from the moment you desire the coffee to the experience.” He adds that this simple desire to drink a cup of coffee can be implemented, although in a much more complex manner, to achieve an individual’s other life goals and that the book guides its readers on how to achieve exactly that. “Conscious manifestation is taking this process from desire to result and instead of manifesting what we don’t want through unconscious manifestation, we consciously use the power of desire, decision, sustained deliberate action, knowing that we’re all gifted with this ability to manifest, because we are created in the image of God the creator.” Mayer’s book also urges individuals to rid themselves of fear, laziness, ignorance and the lack of ambition and commitment which he believes prevents people from reaching their ultimate potential. “So many of us are our own worst enemies and we sabotage ourselves often without even knowing why. “The Conscious Manifestation journey will assist readers to dig deep to discover what they really want, and then give them the tools to make it happen.” He concluded that the ultimate message of his book is simple: “If you know what you want and you’re sure that you want it, you can have it, if you work through the process.” For more information on Conscious Manifestation - Master your life and your business from the inside out,’ visit www.jontimayer.com The Saturday Star