In this week’s A-typical interview, we feature South African professional footballer Robyn Moodaly. The 26-year-old midfielder has represented Banyana Banyana on several occasions including at both the 2012 and 2016 Summer Olympics. She has also won two Cosafa Women’s Championships with the national women’s soccer team, with the latest coming last month. Moodaly has played club football in the US, playing for teams such as AIB Eagles and Northwestern Ohio, before returning home to rejoin JVW Football Club in Bedfordview where she currently plies her trade. Let’s settle the debate, who is king, Ronaldo or Messi? Messi.  He’s a unique individual, there is no one like him. When he’s on the ball he is unstoppable, his ability to move through players, his quick feet , his technique when finishing,  and he’s a team player. He’s someone I can relate to and he’s always been the King of football no doubt. You are able to spend a day with any footballer in the world, learning his or her trade. Who do you choose? Definitely be Messi, he’s always been an inspiration to me. Your ultimate cheat meal includes … ? It would have to be a Nandos meal! What's one live football game you would love to watch? I would love to see Messi live, and Liverpool FC. So I would have to say Liverpool vs Barcelona. Also I’m a Liverpool Fan #YNWA What's the worst date you've ever had? All the dates I’ve been on have been enjoyable. Your favourite item of clothing in your closet is … ? I don’t have a favourite item of clothing,  but I do love sneakers. It’s my obsession at the moment. Which actress would you want to play you if they ever made a movie about your life? Sandra Bullock. The most memorable moment of your footballing career so far was  … ? Attending the Olympics in 2012, 2016. Your three favourite TV series right now are? Greys Anatomy, Money Heist and Power Which three famous people would you love at your fantasy dinner party? Chris Brown, Kevin Hart and Trent Alexander-Arnold. Chris Brown is my favourite singer / dancer. Trent is one of my favourite Liverpool players. Kevin Hart is hilarious and would be great company for a dinner party. The Saturday Star