By Rabbie Serumula It isn't a wonder that the earth moves at the rate of five tremors a day, these days. The ground is trying to escape from beneath our feet. Our soles are tainted. Our souls are tainted. I did not feel the 2.8 magnitude tremor along the West Rand this week, but I know something inside of me moved too. And I am aware where it moved to. The heavens are embarking on a mission to cleanse us with a baptism of heavy rains and thundershowers. Rain Queen Modjadji saw eye to eye with the heavens from her grave at the Royal Cemetery in Limpopo. From within her coffin that survived raging fires where her body was kept the night before her burial, she concurred. We do need cleansing. Too seldom do we look WITHIN, in search of self. Too often do we look WITHOUT, in search of material objects of the world. COME BACK TO YOURSELF DEAR HUMAN. We are fiends to a drug that is the desire for praise and glory from the world. Sometimes too little is common about sense; how do you find yourself in a flock you are trying to fit in to? A flock of sheep who spins a car, badly so, outside a school yard in Durban and plummets into pupils. Education is becoming costlier by the day. We do need cleansing. Maybe we are moving too fast and mother earth is trying to slow us down. But we are accustomed to potholes, and so we swerve. Ducking and weaving. We are a handful to the universe. The heavens are also calling upon Aeolus, the divine keeper of the winds. Who releases them only at the command of greatest gods to wreak devastation upon the world. Let us assume that order has been given, and we are going to learn how to fly in these violent winds that blew a truck on its side in Western Cape. We are fiends to a drug that is the desire for praise and glory from the world. We desire praise by staging videos of kidnappings and human trafficking in Klerksdorp, North West. Too few of us sheep check the authenticity of such before fulfilling our desire to be “the one who shared it first with our peers”. It appears we also have a hankering for the glory of being the most informed, yet we read less. This is not about natural disasters or the weather; the god of wind or Rain Queen. Neither is it about reckless driving or paddling fake news on social media to create panic by play-acting videos of kidnappings and human trafficking. If you are reading this, take it as a reminder of the cleansing that we need. Too seldom do we look WITHIN, in search of self. Too often do we look WITHOUT, in search of material objects of the world. You have been wasting all these years if you have been looking for a sort of trophy you would get if you really did enough to deserve it. In the words of English novelist, Kazuo Ishiguro, you need to be looking for something warm and sheltering. Something you can turn to, regardless of who you become. COME BACK TO YOURSELF DEAR HUMAN. The Saturday Star