Joburg Day fans are literally counting down the hours to one of the city’s biggest musical calendar events which takes place on Friday and for the first time it’s a virtual affair. But the best part for fans is that this year’s concert is free, compliments of Covid-19 but the starts of the day promised to make it extra special. Organisers of the event, Huawei and 94.7, said after what has been a challenging year for South Africa, they have united to create a unique music experience that allows South Africans to sample the best local musical performances. Big names of SA’s music industry including Lady Zamar, Mafikizolo, Riky Rick, James Deacon, Holly Rey and Jeremy Loops are set to take the stage for the first online edition of the popular music event. Station Manager at 94.7, Thando Makhunga, said the artists are excited to give Joburgers a virtual experience like no other. “2020 has changed our lives in a myriad of ways. But the power of music and its ability to move us come rain, shine, bad or good days, is constant. The return of Huawei Joburg Day in this unique format heralds the resurgence of the city. We are Joburg-strong, we keep going,” said Makhunga. The two-hour event will take place from two locations, the first, Blueberry Hotel, famous for its stunning 360-degree view of Johannesburg. The second location is a customised studio that allows for the virtual spectacle to be seamlessly produced. Makhunga said the objective is to create an integrated audio-visual experience for listeners as well as a world-class production for artists. Makhunga continued: “This year we’ve experienced once again how technology allows us to connect with Joburg on a deeper level, just like they connect with us on-air and on social media daily. This concert takes the engagement up a notch”. Huawei Vice Director for Consumer Business in South Africa, Jun sun, said the company has been a proud sponsor of Joburg Day for the past four years and they are avid supporters of SA music. “Music is a great vehicle for connection, and at Huawei we believe in the power of connecting people through our smartphones, laptops and tablets. Music is also about moving people, both physically and emotionally.” Lady Zamar, Mafikizolo, Riky Rick, James Deacon, Holly Rey and Jeremy Loops are set to take the stage for the first online edition of the popular music event. Rising star, James Deacon said lockdown hit very abruptly but looking back, it was a blessing in disguise for him. In 2017, he played in the finale of Dream it Possible (Huawei’s new talent competition to find the opening act for Huawei Joburg Day) still with his arm in a cast following a car accident, and three years later he is on the line-up for the first online Huawei Joburg Day. “It gave me some well needed time to sit and write music and work on making the live show into something different and memorable, and spend time with my family.” “I guess the simple answer is music and family got me through lockdown,”said Deacon. He said an event of this kind is an SA first – possibly an African first. “I feel really privileged to be included as one of the artists at this milestone event, it is really inspiring to see how Huawei and 947 and the other organizers have joined forces with some of SA’s best Artists to create an incredible event that is a first of its kind.” Fans of the Deacon can look forward to his new single, “Take Control” which drops on October 23, along with a brand new music video. Rapper, Ricky Rick, who is well known not only for his music but also his eclectic style said the virtual event promises to be loads of fun for the viewers and listeners. “I am excited to see how people will respond to the artists and the amazing locations. This is not going to be the new normal forever. I do think there is some fatigue for many artists but it also gives us the opportunity to do something different from what people have seen before.” Fans can join the free virtual event here. The Saturday Star