Rapper, vocalist, songwriter and model Mikhale Jones is an upcoming musician who recently signed for Afroforce1/Universal label and launched her new single My Soul this month. The Joburg-based underground rapper is a former member of the Christian hip hop collective Unique. In 2014, she made her TV debut on SABC1’s YoTV performing as a backup dancer with Mariechan, the former Jamali singer. The 25 year old also made a cameo in the Buffalo Soulja music video, Ziyawa. She has worked with various underground hip hop artists and house music producers, namely the likes of Tribal Kingz and Bradz La Muzik. You are able to take on any female rapper in a rap battle.  Which rapper do you choose to take on? I cannot freestyle to save my life , it always ends up in a mumble – but if I had to choose my fighter, ROUGE is taking my place. LOL! Nicki Minaj or Cardi B ? Who do you love more? I think I’m more Cardi B – It’s the attitude without the music for me! Bro do you see how happy that woman is while she works? You are able to collaborate with any rap artist in the world. Who do you choose? Chance the Rapper. The brother’s energy is attractive as hell! And I’m all for conversational style of writing. He does it with his eyes closed! Your favourite outfit in your wardrobe is… ? I wear my Air Force 1 sneakers a little too much, I even wore it to my last performance with a whole sequins jumpsuit … My sneakers, grey sweatpants and sports bra all day everyday! Sneakers or heels? Sneakers! Who was the better rapper , Tupac or Biggie? Is it uncultured to say I don’t know? LOL. My little brothers play Tupac more than he does Biggie so I’m going to choose Tupac. The person who inspires you the most in this world is… ? There’s a list of women I’m surrounded by who push crazy hustles and never stop (so I’m constantly inspired by so many)… but I’m going to say the person who really inspires me is the version of me I’m yet to be/ become. That image is beautiful! You can invite any three famous people for a dinner party you are hosting. Which three people do you choose? Kehlani, Rihanna and Doja Cat The meal that most reminds you of your childhood is… ? Umngqusho! You are stuck in a lift with President Cyril Ramaphosa. What is the first thing you ask him? I heard you worked at ABSA …explain the transition please? From the bank to the world – teach me your ways! The Saturday Star