Johannesburg - The headlines of the coronavirus pandemic might have been the escalating cases around the world, the distressing mortality rates and the scores of individuals and businesses who were struggling to make ends meet. But for many, loneliness during the lockdown came almost as a secondary pandemic which also gave people the time to reflect on their broken relationships. Now, in the midst of the global health crisis, a South African television show aims to “reconnect broken families and promote healing.” “Covid-19 and the resulting lockdown restrictions prevented us from making contact with people we love and we had lots of time to look inward and ponder what those connections mean to us,” Cato Bekker, the producer and presenter of the local hit show ‘Die Uitnodiging’ told The Saturday Star this week. The Afrikaans show, which airs on DSTV’s KykNet on Tuesday (Oct 6), will bring people together with their estranged loved ones through the help of a neutral mediator who will foster an open and honest conversation in a comfortable setting. Bekker who is a KykNet regular and has also worked extensively on radio, explained that she came up with the show’s concept through her travels abroad. “In the Netherlands, I discovered a wonderful TV program with the potential to work in South Africa as well,” she said. “It's perfect for this Covid era, where we all had to sit in our homes for months and do some introspection. Who have I hurt? Which family member is no longer talking to whom? Which of my friendships are broken, but can still be mended? ” The acclaimed media personality explained that while applications for the show have been open prior to and post the arrival of the novel coronavirus, the sentiments of the applicants during these two periods differed significantly. “Before the lockdown, entries for our show had a similar tone: ‘I miss my family or friend’.”  “But during the Covid lockdown period, we received entries with an additional undertone: ‘Life is short’.” She believes that during the countrywide shutdown, many people have realised the importance of fostering healthy relationships. “We find happiness in a feeling of belonging, in being loved and merging into a community and now more than ever is the ideal time to fix broken relationships, to reconnect families and friends, given the spotlight that Covid has shone on what our loved ones mean to us.” With the success of the reality show format in South Africa including the likes of Idols SA, Date My Family and Our Perfect Wedding, Bekker believes that not only is the Die Uitnodiging’ what the nation needs now, but that it will also resonate with viewers. “Reality TV is relatable.” “You can see yourself in a show, or your friends and sometimes you might gain a bird’s eye view of a situation that you've experienced yourself, and then you're keen to see how someone else figured it out.” She hopes that ‘Die Uitnodiging’ will have a similar effect on viewers. “I expect our audiences’ reactions to reflect what you’ll see in the show.  There are moments that make you laugh, moments that make you think, and moments that make you cry.” But while the aim of the show, according to Bekker, is to “bring people together and perhaps even to inspire some to pick up the phone and take the first step of making amends in a relationship that needs healing,” she admitted that being part of this process was an emotional one. “The most painful part of the show is when we’ve been working on a story and we saw the issue at hand and wanted to help them solve it but then - for whatever reason – it simply falls apart.” “That’s really tough, and we experienced it a few times,” she admitted. But for many others, the quest to repair their broken bonds was a fruitful one. “There’s a really big moment at the end of each episode where we find out if the family members or the friends have accepted our invitation and will be attending the dinner.” “Together with the person who entered the show, I anxiously wait for them to emerge when that limo door opens … or not and there’s a moment when they get out of the car, before anyone has said a word, when they hug.” “I’m really fond of that very moment because emotion translates into hugs and there’s so much dialogue going on when people hug silently.” “I love seeing people hug when they’re connecting again. I feel like that’s where conversation actually begins.” As many of ‘Die Uitnodiging’s’ participants have found a new lease on life through their repaired bonds, Cato also hopes that those watching will have the same experience. “In life it is inevitable to make small mistakes here and there, that’s how we learn.  What is really important - after making a mistake - is that we apologise and try to fix the damage.” “Reconnecting people not only benefits the parties directly involved, but also the wider family, who get to see role models for healthy communication.” Applications for ‘Die Uitnodiging’s are still open and Bekker appealed to those who have broken relationships with their loved ones to contact them. Those who apply have to be over the age of 21 and must reside in Johannesburg or the Western Cape. The Saturday Star