Like style, champagne never goes out of fashion, and now you can pop your favourite bubbly to celebrate a special occasion or just toast to life. Bubbly boss, Moët & Chandon, pulled out all the stops with this year’s Moët Grand Day, with the theme “Toast to Togetherness” uniting stars across the African Continent. The champers giant said after what’s been a challenging year and at a time when individuals, communities and nations have never felt more disconnected, the 2020 Moët Grand Day “Toast to Togetherness” stands as a reminder to champagne fans throughout Africa, that even the smallest moments of victory, achievement and success are worth celebrating. This year’s grand toast was led by stars across the region – chosen and admired for their unique contributions to both their nations and their pride in Africa. Guests spanned an impressive spectrum, from musicians to moguls, all united in this moment of celebration. Personalised magnums of Moët Nectar Impérial, hand-delivered along with gold glasses, popped across the continent yesterday. Moët Grand Day has been celebrated worldwide since 2016, with glamorous large-scale experiences. “With sensitivity to the current time, our hope with this year’s Moët Grand Day ‘Toast to Togetherness’ was to celebrate the talent and promise that exists across this magnificent continent, with more intimate experiences filled with the same joie de vivre. And to offer, those who proudly fly the African flag, a moment to pause and toast – to moments and milestones worth celebrating,” said Pascal Asin, Moët & Chandon managing director for Africa and the Middle East. Moët Grand Day “Toast to Togetherness” celebrations took many forms – guests celebrated at intimate gatherings, with stylish soirées at home; toasting to sunsets or dining al fresco with friends. Stars, dressed in dazzling gold, all raised their glasses in celebration at exactly 5.43pm yesterday afternoon, as the sun set on Champagne Day 2020. Stars from SA, Kenya, Tanzania, Cameroon, DR Congo and Ivory Coast all joined in the evening’s celebrations. Boity Thulo and Maps Maponyane raised their glasses and joined the likes of Tanzanian media and tech entrepreneur Irene Kiwia, Cameroon’s international champion boxer Francis Gannou, as well as award-winning fashion, travel and lifestyle entrepreneur Lucia Musau from Kenya, in a grand toast across continents. “Most importantly, the 2020 Moët Grand Day ‘Toast to Togetherness’ stood  as a reminder that champagne always has the ability to elevate life beyond the ordinary. That, despite the uncertainties we face, we can and should still toast to personal moments that matter, and create memories that last a lifetime. As we fast approach the end of the year and the promise of the festive season awaits us, Moët & Chandon fans worldwide are invited to join the celebrations, whether at home or at intimate gatherings with loved ones. After all, if there’s one thing that reminds one of celebration, it has to be the popping of a cork,” said Asin. Founded in 1743, Moët & Chandon is the “maison” that contributed to introducing champagne to the world, where each champagne dazzles and delights with bright fruitiness, an enticing palate and an elegant maturity. The Saturday Star