A woman is murdered every three hours in South Africa and 40% of women will be raped in their lifetime. The national abuse hotline received 120 000 calls in the first three weeks of lockdown alone. It is against the backdrop of these shocking statistics that women are leading the charge for change in South Africa. #GiveHerACrown is a female empowerment platform that aims to change the narrative for women in South Africa through the power of storytelling and the arts. The initiative aims to tell the stories of all women: the survivors, the activists, the influencers, the pioneers, and the next generation. #GiveHerACrown ambassador, Zolani Mahola, is composing and recording a new song for the campaign which will be released next month and various local artists will create bespoke crowns of art using their material of choice, from wood to wire, lace to fabric, steel to ceramics and more. The crowns will be auctioned off during the 16 Days of Activism Campaign which takes place from November 25 to December 10. Mahola, whose name means the one who sings, is of course no stranger to South Africans, and said she is excited to be the face and forerunner of the campaign. “All over the world, our stories are being challenged and we are being called to not only reclaim our narratives but to intentionally craft ones that are to our highest benefit as individuals and as a species,” she said. Mahola added that #GiveHerACrown is essentially about acknowledging our connection to each other. “We all come from women, the life-bearers who are more often than not the rock of the family. Through this campaign and movements like it we remind each other of the incredible wealth and strength that lies in feminine power. This power is fierce and gentle and must be nurtured if we are to create the country and world of our highest dreams,” said Mahola. Born in Port Elizabeth in 1981, she studied theatre and performance at UCT and this is where she met the musicians with whom she would later form the pan-African multi-cultural group, Freshlyground. Seventeen years and seven albums later, Freshlyground became a household name and is now known as one of Africa’s most acclaimed bands. They have captured the heart of the continent and have claimed global recognition. Mahola is especially respected for unifying the country through music and bridging social, racial and cultural divides through her commentary both artistically and as a thought leader. Her spheres of interests lie in educating children, our connection to nature and in the power of our chosen story. She has recently recorded her debut solo material with Grammy nominated producer JB Arthur which will be released later this year. “It feels very good to be a part of GHAC... so often in our society we focus on the negative and dark parts of human nature. For me it’s very important what we place emphasis on as a nation because I believe that what we accentuate persists. So the idea of acknowledging women in our lives who have been a positive influence or have gone unsung ... it’s about upliftment and in the end that’s what we need to form stronger ties as a community and as a nation,” said Mahola. The songbird said she believes the issue of gender based violence is so pervasive in our country that the more we emphasise the gentle nature of our people it can only be good not only for women but for all sectors of society. She added that she also believes “self-belief” is one of the biggest challenges women face. “Often we don’t see examples of people who stand in their power and live their most authentic lives. This challenge affects all of us across genders in a country where people’s sense of self has been so decimated by the legacy of colonialism and apartheid. Many of us struggle to see the best in ourselves and to believe that we can live the life of our dreams,” said Mahola. Other influencer women who have joined #GiveHerACrown include former Miss World ( 2014), Rolene Strauss, radio personality, Elana Afrika, musician, Lady Zamar and actress, model and television host, Pearl Thusi. The public is invited to #GiveHerACrown and share stories of women in their lives by giving them a digital crown. The Saturday Star