Reality TV star, former erotic dancer, entertainer, actress, and business owner Perlé van Schalkwyk, better known as Gigi, was crowned winner of reality TV show Survivor in 2010. Prior to her win, Gigi was an erotic dancer for over a decade, and now owns popular Joburg strip club Lollipop Lounge. She was a member of the Performing Arts Council of the Transvaal, and while performing in Spellbound at Sun City her passion for dancing ignited and she moved into the exotic entertainment field. She won the title “Penthouse Pet” in 1997 and the title “Striptease Queen” in the same year. She has created and performed in a number of successful stage productions, including Nipplecaps and G-strings and Whore; and appeared on the big screen in the Willie Esterhuizen comedy film Poena is Koning in 2007. Van Schalkwyk has also this month released her tell-all memoir titled Nipple Caps and G-Strings. The biggest misconception people have of Gigi is …? That I am a party girl, but I am a country girl at heart. If you were stuck on an island with one person, who would that person be? My husband, Mike, as he would take great care of me. The man is an incredible chef. Take us back to the craziest party you ever had in your life. What was that like? It was a surprise farewell party that I arranged for my sister before she emigrated to Holland. I invited all her boyfriends. And she had many! If you could change anything from your past, what would it be and why? I should have stayed in Paris after I auditioned and was chosen to dance at the Crazy Horse Saloon. It’s a great cabaret venue in the heart of Paris. But I was travelling at the time and decided not to take the contract. The best and worst thing about being a strip club boss is? The best thing is working with the girls, I love my job. The worst thing is the late nights and early mornings. I get home at three in the morning after we have cashed up. The meal that most reminds you of your childhood is? Pap and vleis. Your favourite outfit as a stripper was? It was a little gold sequinned dress. With gold stilettos. Your top three TV series currently are? Alone, Ratched and Two and a Half Men. I love Charlie’s character. You are only able to do one exercise for the rest of your life. Which exercise do you choose? Walking. I love walking with my dogs at the sea. Your most embarrassing moment in life so far was …? It happened on a trip to Zanzibar. The bellboy had the name of the wrong man that was escorting me to Zanzibar on his welcome sign as we landed at the airport. Look at chapter 32 in Nipple Caps and G-strings for the full story. I ended up fighting with my companion for most of the trip. The Saturday Star