Johannesburg - Award-winning artist, cook, guitarist and vocalist João da Fonseca, better known as J’Something, is one of the members of renowned South African band, Mi Casa. The band comprises Mo-T, the trumpeter, Dr Duda who is the producer and the pianist, and 32-yearold J’Something who is the guitarist and the vocalist. The band has released several albums since they launched in 2011, and has bagged numerous prestigious music awards. Aside from his success as a musician, J’Something is also a chef and until recently owned his own restaurant ‘Something’s Cooking by J’Something’. He also started a cooking show called MyKitchen, where he throws down the most delicious meals in the most effortless ways. You are on death row. You are granted one last meal and drink. What do you choose to eat and drink? We often ‘play’ this game at home. I would ask for piri piri chicken delivered from Portugal and some ice cold beer. Craziest fan moment you’ve had in your music career so far is… ? One time I saw this girl rip off another girl’s weave just to get to the front of the stage. She ended up throwing the weave on stage. That was pretty wild. It was hard to sing after that. You are able to attend any one live sporting event anywhere in the world. Which event do you choose to attend? A boxing match between Anthony Joshua and Tyson Fury (if it happens)… Front row seats of course. I think this fight would go down as one of the greatest of all times. Boxing is a great sport, and there is no boxing like a heavyweight showdown. The best and worst thing about being under lockdown with your wife? Ahhhhh we’ve enjoyed so much quality time together. We’ve cooked together, had incredible conversations, gotten to endure together which is a gift only a moment like this could give. We have also had so much time with our family which has been the greatest gift ever. Honestly negatives are hard to find. We haven’t really gotten under one another’s skin yet. We have a full house. What’s your favourite song to sing in the shower? Mmmm depends what song is in my head. It could be anything really, there is always a song in my head. Right now I’m thinking of Stir It Up by Bob Marley. You are stuck in a lift with Helen Zille. What’s the first question you ask her? Not sure I would actually say anything. Not because of anything other than I don’t know her so probably wouldn’t engage with her. If anything I’d say hi and how are you lol. You are able to take on any SA celebrity in a 12-round charity boxing match. Which celebrity do you choose? There is no right answer to this. Haha… no one I’d really want to box with, not really my vibe, but I reckon I would take on Mpho Popps, because I reckon whatever the outcome we’d have a beer and a good laugh, and I’d probably beat him (haha). A well known pizza joint is coming up with the J Something pizza. You can choose the toppings. What are the main toppings that go on the pizza? Oooooooo… my type of thing. Anchovies, olives, red onion, artichokes, garlic and chili finished off with some wild rocket and drizzle of olive oil. What’s the one thing your fans don’t know about you? I want to be a farmer one day. This is my dream. Grow, produce and feed my family food I have grown and hopefully others in my community. Your top three favourite TV series of all time are… ? Of all time is tricky but I’d go with Vikings, Narcos seasons 1 and 2, and right now I’m watching Away which is pretty dope. The Saturday Star