It is no surprise who Kgolagano Rakhudu’s favourite basketball player of all time is. “Kobe Bryant was one player that influenced me a lot when growing up – his mindset, work ethic and how he approached the game,” says Rakhudu. “His level of preparation was unparalleled and a great signal that no matter how successful you have been, you have to stay disciplined.” Bryant was also well known for his devotion to the youth. The five-time National Basketball Association (NBA) champion, 2008 NBA Most Valuable Player, 18-time NBA All Star, and two-time Olympic gold medallist with team USA, dedicated all his time and effort to the youth once he called it quits on his successful basketball career in 2016. And it’s no surprise that Rakhudu has chosen to follow in the footsteps of his idol. For the last nine years of his life, he has been hard at work running the Royal Bafokeng Jr NBA programme in the North West. He left his job as an engineer to join the programme full time and to focus on developing talented young basketball players. The programme is a partnership between Royal Bafokeng and the NBA, and was launched in 2011 with the main aim of developing young and talented players. The 29-year-old has been pivotal to its success, and has impressed so much that he was selected as one of the top 200 young South Africans – forby the Mail and& Guardian. Rakhudu also brings a wealth of experience to the programme having interned at NBA Summer League in Las Vegas and coached at Basketball Without Borders Africa and Global camps at NBA All-Star Weekends. “I first learned about the Jr NBA programme from my siblings. I had a long debate with them. I didn’t think it possible that the NBA was in Phokeng. “My siblings invited me to the programme launch and I decided to attend to support them. “A few weeks later I attended an open gym to play and one of the coaches saw me play. He asked if I would be interested in coaching. “I said I would think about it … I remember going home that day. I did some research and decided to join. I’ve never looked back.” The programme is focused on introducing the global sport to the youth and community in the North West. “It has introduced basketball as a sporting code into the Royal Bafokeng schools and community via training of coaches, implementing Jr NBA as an after-school programme, and creating primary school, middle school and high school basketball leagues for boys and girls,” says Rakhudu. “It uses the transformative power of the game and teaches our youth the fundamentals of the game while instilling values such as teamwork, respect, leadership and sportsmanship.” The programme has been a huge success, winning the 2017 Sport Development Programme of the Year at the South African Sport Industry Awards. “Over the past 10 years the programme has grown to 114 teams from 44 schools with a direct impact on more than 10 000 young boys and girls. It has produced coaches and officials at national and international level. Nine players and two coaches have represented South Africa at international events.” During this season, the NBA and its teams reached more than 60 million youth in 72 countries through league play, in-school programming, clinics, skills challenges, and other outreach events. “We teach the game of basketball, but also focus on the values of our game, wellness and developing life skills while working in a safe and fun environment. It’s a holistic approach that is intended to strengthen the culture of youth basketball, teach life lessons, and empower young boys and girls to live a full and healthy lifestyle.” Having been part of the programme for the last ten10 years, Rakhudu is confident that South Africa has the potential to produce world-class basketball players that could one day very well feature in the NBA. “We are well resourced to produce great players. Provinces like KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, Eastern Cape and Limpopo have physically gifted players.” He says it’s also possible that South Africa could unearth the next Michael Jordan. “It is our duty as coaches to discover that talent and nurture it. With the impact of basketball in the Royal Bafokeng Nation and studying the history of basketball in the country, I am more encouraged that there are a lot of players that can really benefit.” Rakhudu is also confident that basketball can develop into one of South Africa’s mainstream sports in the future. “We have had several players that have played overseas, including US high schools and colleges. We are not producing at a level we should, but the game is growing. “When you look at the Royal Bafokeng Nation, there used to be only one club and one school playing the sport. Now basketball is the number one sport in the region.” For Rakhudu, working with the NBA has been a dream come true. “This was one of the best decisions I made since I pivoted from engineering to sports. I have been surrounded by people who have wanted nothing but the best for me.” He says as part of the broader NBA and Royal Bafokeng partnership, 18 new and refurbished basketball courts were built across the five Royal Bafokeng regions. And Rakhudu has also enjoyed some wonderful milestones with the programme. “We hosted the first Jr NBA Africa Festival, held at the Royal Bafokeng Sports Palace in Phokeng, North West , in early August 2017. “It brought together boys and girls ages 14 and under from Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa and Zimbabwe. The festival taught the children the fundamental skills and core values of the game, including teamwork, leadership, fitness and healthy living. “Some of our coaches have also participated in coaches and administration training attending Basketball Without Borders Global Camps in the US as part of NBA All-Star, interned at NBA Summer League and coached andat Basketball Without Borders Africa camps here on the continent. “Over the past 10 years many NBA and WNBA players, legends and coaches have visited and provided mentorship to the youth, including Hall of Famers Hakeem Olajuwon (Nigeria) and Dikembe Mutombo (DRC), NBA Legends Cedric Ceballos (US), Sam Perkins (US), Luol Deng (South Sudan) and Ronny Turiaf (France), WNBA Legends Ruth Riley (US), Astou Ndiaye (Senegal), and Ticha Penicheiro (Portugal) to name a few.” Rakhudu hopes that the sport continues to grow and he is certain that we will see many South Africans in the NBA in the future. “The potential is here. We have the infrastructure, resources and people to make this a reality. Basketball is the number two team sport globally and it is no different in Africa. It will continue growing.” The Saturday Star