Sean Dundee is smiling from ear to ear. The former Liverpool FC player, sitting at his home, in Karlsruhe, in Germany, just witnessed a superb performance by his former team against Arsenal in the English Premier League, which saw the Reds cruise to a 3-1 victory at Anfield. And it’s got the Durban-born striker is beaming. “That’s three wins on the trot now, and they were three really tough games,” an excited Dundee tells The Saturday Star via a Skype call. The 47-year-old, who had a short spell at Liverpool FC in 1998, playing under managers Roy Evans and Gerard Houllier, is thrilled the Reds kicked off their season with a perfect start. Dundee expects an incredibly tough season, but he is confident the Reds will be worthy challengers after ending their 30-year drought by cruising to the league title last season. “I do think they have a chance. When you see Manchester City dropping points already, it gives you even more hope that the boys can do it again. It’s about getting a good start. They’ve got three wins out of three. They need to build on that, and take each game as it comes. So far, Liverpool won all three of their Premier League games, handing defeats to Leeds United, Chelsea and Arsenal on Monday. Dundee, who also played German outfit VfB Stuttgart, believes there are a few teams that could challenge Liverpool, though. “Chelsea have strengthened, and they look good. But they have many new players who have barely played together, and it will take them time to gel as a team. “Manchester City will always be the closest followers. But as long as they continue to drop points unnecessarily, I don’t see anybody keeping up with Liverpool as long as they have a fit squad and are able to keep winning.” He hopes that the Covid-19 pandemic does not interrupt the business of winning for the champions. Several Premier League players have tested positive for the coronavirus, including its new star signing Thiago Alcantara. Nine other Premier League players or staff members have tested positive too. This is the highest number of positive results announced by the Premier League after a round of testing, and could put a halt to proceedings. But Dundee is hopeful that the pandemic doesn’t end the season. The Reds have brought in three new faces – Alcantara from European Champions Bayern Munich, Wolves forward Diogo Jota and Olympiakos left back Kostas Tsmikas. “They didn’t do too much business. There is no need to change so much when you have a winning team. “Thiago is a huge boost. He brings quality, great experience, and can help improve the midfielders around him. He offers a different dimension to what Klopp can put out. “They’ve made small minor adjustments, which might just be what they need to stay ahead.” Dundee also believes that Liverpool will prioritise the league over any other competition this season. “Any supporter will tell you the league is the most important thing. It would mean so much if they can equal Manchester United’s league title tally of 20 titles. “I know many Manchester United supporters who would hate to see Liverpool win their 20th title. I expect them to go all out.” Dundee is impressed with his former club under the management of Jurgen Klopp. “They were so close to winning the title two years ago, only for Manchester City to win by a single point. But the great thing is they never dropped off the pressure and kept on pushing, and then last season was simply incredible. “Nobody really expects them to do it again. How great would it be for them to go on and win that number 20? “I love the mentality that Klopp has instilled into this team. When they lose, they lose together, when they win, they win together. It doesn’t matter who makes mistakes or who scores the goals. It’s always a team effort.” Dundee is full of praise for Klopp. “When Jurgen was still at Borussia Dortmund, I loved him. Even at his  previous club Mainz, he looked like such a winner. “I played against him when he was manager of Mainz, and we managed to knock them out of a cup. But I was so impressed by his personality. He is a magnificent coach, a coach I wish I had worked under. “I’m sure there are many people who would have loved to see Jurgen fail, but he has done exceptionally well, and no matter what happens in the rest of his time there, he has done a better job than anyone else could have.” Dundee only has praise for the front three, Sadio Mane, Roberto Firmino, and Mohamed Salah. “They have been doing the business every season ... What stood out for me in the past two seasons is that they are consistent. When one player is off his game, the other fills in and does the job. When all three are on song, they are unbeatable. “At the back, Virgil Van Dijk is a leader and one of the best defenders in the world. I would like us to tighten up a little at the back though, as we shipped too many goals in our opening game against Leeds.” Dundee has also spoken about his personal experience of playing for Liverpool FC. While his stint was short, he says he had an incredible time. “It was a great feeling and a moment I dreamt of my whole life. I must admit that I was an Everton fan growing up, but being able to join one of the biggest clubs in the world was an incredible feeling. “At that young age, I think initially I was more excited to meet the players I had watched on TV for such a long time – Robbie Fowler, Steve McManaman, Paul Ince, Michael Owen. To have those players around you in a change room is a feeling that I cannot describe. In hindsight, I should have savoured those moments more. Dundee says he learned many lessons at the club, but the most important one was how supportive the fans are. “Back then, we were not as successful, but when things weren’t going well for the team, the supporters still gave us their undying support. “As long as you were trying and fighting, no matter what the result was, the fans would have your back.” “The fans have that expectation that, as long as you are wearing the Red shirt, you must die for the club, and that’s what I love about this club and their fans.” The Saturday Star