On the streets of Joburg, Ah Tong took a bullet, not for a cause, but because he was in the wrong place at the wrong time. That bullet fired nearly a hundred years ago came from either the barrel of a striking miner’s rifle or the gun of a soldier or policeman. How Ah Tong came to be shot, and where his final resting place lies, has been lost to history, but now researchers want to change that. Friends of Johannesburg Cemeteries, which is part of the Johannesburg Heritage Association, are trying to find Ah Tong’s grave and they have asked the public for help. The Friends of Johannesburg Cemeteries have been searching for the graves of the victims of the 1922 miners’ strike, in the lead up to the centenary of the event. “He was definitely one of the victims, and was purely at the wrong place, at the wrong time,” says one of the researchers Sarah Welham. “In different documents, his name is spelt differently.” What little is known about Ah Tong is that he was a Chinese national of Cantonese origin, who owned a shop and a “native eating house”, and was caught up in one of the most violent chapters of the City’s history. The 1922 strike saw fierce house to house fighting, aircraft bombing Joburg’s suburbs and even a tank used to flush out miners on the streets of Fordsburg. It also saw at least 42 civilians killed in over a week fighting. Also known as the Rand Revolt, the 1922 strike was triggered by the price of gold nose diving in the latter part of 1921. This resulted in a decrease in wages and the weakening of the colour bar that prohibited black miners from taking jobs reserved for whites. This angered the white miners and their unions, and it resulted in strikes across the Rand. By March 10, the strike turned violent and had become an open rebellion against the state. The Communist Party actively supported the strike, and the newspapers quickly began referring to the strikers as Reds or Bolsheviks. Commandos and soldiers were called up to restore order across Johannesburg and the East Rand. Well known Joburg landmarks became the sites of desperate fighting. A detachment of Imperial Light Horse sustained heavy casualties when they were fired upon from the ridges above Ellis Park. There were trenches dug across Fordsburg Square. The government responded with overwhelming force, which included the use of artillery. It was during this chaos on March 12 that Ah Tong was shot. Where he was shot is not known. It might have happened near his home at 1 High street, in Fordsburg. On that day, government forces attacked the rebels who were on the Brixton ridge and took 2200 prisoners. The injured Ah Tong was taken to the old Johannesburg hospital where he died the following day. Then, says Welham, something strange happened. Ah Tong was initially buried in a cemetery in Milner Park. “Then, the next day, he was interred in the Brixton cemetery, they dug him up and put him in there. As to why, I have no idea.” There his grave was swallowed by history and searches for his tombstone have yielded nothing. Welham and others have found the graves of the other victims of the rebellion. With the help of genealogy websites and a bit of snooping around old tombstones, most have been found. Ah Tong’s grave however has eluded them. Recently, Welham approached The Chinese Association in the hope that a relative of Ah Tong might come forward. A message was posted on their Facebook page. Walter Pon, an elder in the Chinese community, left his contact details on the bottom of the message. Then a reply to the post came from Sydney, Australia. Someone remembered how during visits to the Brixton cemetery decades ago, people would point out the grave of the Chinese man who was killed by the strikers. But they can’t remember the exact location of the grave. It is a possible clue, but it doesn’t make finding Ah Tong’s final resting place any easier. What makes it even harder is that Pon believes Ah Tong was not the man’s real name. His name was probably lost when it was mangled and misinterpreted by state officials who didn’t have an ear for the foreigners and their strange language. But the hope is that someone might just remember a forgotten grave in a cemetery and give back the name of a man. The Saturday Star