South Africans who are blessed with unique talents could soon follow in the footsteps of international superstars Ashton Kutcher, Katie Holmes and Eva Longoria. This weekend, The International ARTS Talent Showcase (IATS) who originally scouted the movie star trio, will travel to Gauteng in their quest to unearth the next South African phenomenon and take them into the global stage. During their three-day visit to Silverstar Casino in the west rand which ends today, six international industry professionals will watch the local talents in live action through a television screen due to restrictions imposed by the Covid-19 pandemic. They include senior executive casting director for Tyler Perry Studios Rhavynn Drummer, Blaze Johnson, who has worked for America's Got Talent, Voice America and US X Factor, Joey Hunter from The International Modeling and Talent Association (IMTA) as well as the former President of Ford Models. But those who take to the stage will also have a live audience who will all pay to watch the live show. IATS director Elsubie Verlinden told The Saturday Star this week that the judges are specifically looking for individuals who are passionate and have unique skills related to the fashion or performing arts industry. Those who are selected will then go on to represent Africa at the July 2021 IMTA Convention in New York City. Verlinden explained that the exposure this platform brings is unmatched and parachutes them into the international spotlight. “What we do at The International ARTS Talent Showcase has never been done before and we have the largest most accredited international panel evaluating all the models, actors, singers and dancers we have personally auditioned and selected for our national showcase over the past nine months.” “Previous contestants have had the opportunity to walk runways at New York and LA Fashion Week,” she said. “Dancers have also performed in music videos with Taylor Swift, Bea Miller and Jessie Jay.” IATS’s alumni have also booked spots for over 1000 national and international brands such as Louis Vuitton, Dolce and Gabbana, Calvin Clein, NBA Billboards, Tiffany and Co, New York Fashion Week, Paris Fashion Week and LA Fashion Week. “We have two artist that made it to the television round of American Idol and locally we have shot over 1200 commercial, booked Disney Films, Marvel Avengers and Netflix to name a few.” Verlinden, a former professional actress and commercial model explained that she started IATS, whose tagline is “International is Not Impossible,” in a bid to help others who are facing similar struggles to the ones she experienced in the industry. “The gap between Africa and first world opportunities and castings are far-fetched and I decided to dedicate my life to bringing in agents and casting directors from America to audition, educate and present workshops to local talent so that we can also get a fair and well deserved chance to obtain international exposure and educational opportunities.” While the showcase could earn talented South Africans a permanent spot in the international spotlight, Verlinden added that IATS also helps them improve their skills and manage their careers. “We don’t just create international exposure and opportunities for our talent but we also allow them to obtain international scholarships to obtain international education.” “Our objective is to help aspiring models, actors, singers and dancers by educating and equipping them with first world education and training and assisting them with what is necessary to be leaders in the industry.” Verlinden is cognisant about the challenges of breaking into the highly competitive and sought after fashion and performing arts industry, but she believes that South Africans have a lot to offer. “We might be a third world country but we have first world potential.” While the global health crisis has dampened proceedings as the esteemed panel of judges are forced to watch the audition virtually, this year’s show will still be a special one. Not only will IATS be celebrating their 10th annual showcase this weekend, the show will also be dedicated to Verlinden best friend Addi Lang, who died from breast cancer this year. “This year's talent showcase is taking place during Cancer Awareness month and it is dedicated to my best friend Addi Lang who fought an endless fight against breast cancer.” “She believed that each caterpillar will get their time to shine, if you can remain focused and patient with your journey, running your own race and never comparing your life to others.” Tickets for the The International ARTS Talent Showcase (IATS) are still available. For more information, contact Elouise Janse van Rensburg on 078 259 4499 or email itsartsafrica@gmail.com The Saturday Star