The Blue Train, which has transported people around South Africa in luxury for almost a century, was literally stopped in its tracks for nearly six months during the country’s Covid-19 pandemic. The national landmark, which once carried former president Nelson Mandela, supermodel Naomi Campbell, US record producer Quincy Jones and Archbishop Desmond Tutu was one of the many tourism facilities around the world which was forced to cease their operations as the novel coronavirus ripped through the globe. During this period, travellers could no longer escape the mundane routines of their daily lives in favour of splendour, elegance as well as a unique and transcendent journey through the rainbow nation. While its staff spent much of the lockdown completing luxury-specific and service refresher courses and none were retrenched, they were unable to continue their work aboard the luxury train. But as the country enjoys increased freedoms under level one of the lockdown, The Blue Train’s full services will resume for all kinds of travel just in time for the festive season. In a bid to entice tourists, the award-winning local train which frequents the 1600 kilometre journey from Pretoria to Cape Town, is offering discounted rates between November and March. “The specials are available to the global market, and are mainly targeted at residents of South Africa, with the aim of encouraging them to reacquaint themselves with the beauty of our landscape,” The Blue Train’s executive manager Vincent Monyake told The Saturday Star this week. “Most importantly, it’s a reprieve from being cooped up at home, giving them space to take their time without lockdown anxiety.” Monyake explained that while they suspended their operations from March, they were able to continue with their private charters, which focuses on business conferences, group business travel and events since September. “This was a means to offer relief to businesses that needed to carry out any Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions (MICE) activities in a contained, safe space that is still unparalleled in its luxury offering.” But from November 1, this mode of travel, whose slogan is ‘A window to the soul of Africa’ will be fully open to the public. “We are ready to resume our full operations which include our leisure travel for individuals,” the executive manager said. But as health experts warn that the global health crisis is far from over, Monyake insisted that The Blue Train is as Covid compliant as it can be. “The Blue Train’s hygiene and safety protocols are in line with the measures set out by the Department of Tourism and the World Health Organisation,” he said. “The protocols ensure that there is adherence to the highest level of hygiene for the safety of our guests.” “What has also been key for us throughout this process has been to ensure that our valuable guests and clients have peace of mind and get to experience The Blue Train at its multiple award-winning service levels.” Some of the precautionary measures which The Blue Train’’s staff have been working hard to put in place includes its guests completing questionnaires relating to their health a few days before they begin their travel, as well as on the travel date before arrival at the train station. “Travellers will have to produce a negative Covid-19 test that is not older than 72 hours,” Monyake added. The Blue Train’s guests will also have to complete a second pre-screening process which will be initiated by way of a follow-up questionnaire. “The questionnaire will be emailed to all guests, and in the questionnaire, if three or more questions are affirmative, The Blue Train’s Health and Safety Department will make contact for further clarity,” Monyake said. Travellers will also be issued with a safety pack upon arrival on The Blue Train which includes face masks and hand sanitisers, which will also be made widely available throughout the carrier. Monyake said that staff will also be wearing face masks and latex gloves as they render their services throughout the journey, that the train will continuously be cleaned and sanitised while it is in motion and that the air conditioning is serviced before departure and on arrival at end destination. “There will be a medical practitioner on-board The Blue Train and an isolation car with two suites made available for quarantine purposes.” While those at The Blue Train are determined to keep their facilities a coronavirus-free zone, they are cognisant that some of their efforts could still be in vain and that there is still a real possibility of the virus rearing its ugly head. “Should any guest test positive while en-route, a risk assessment will be conducted to identify all the people and areas that the positive case might have come in contact with,” explained Monyake. “Anyone who would have come in contact with the said guest will be asked to isolate in their suite until they have been attended to by the medical practitioner with symptom checks.” He added that those who are infected with the coronavirus while in transit will then be required to quarantine in the reserved quarantine suites on board The Blue Train and will be assisted by their medical practitioner. “At the next train station, The Blue Train team will arrange for the patient to be transferred to a nearby hospital depending on the assessment from the medical practitioner, where the patient will receive further medical assistance and where necessary, their next of kin will be contacted and kept abreast of any developments.” While confined spaces such as The Blue Train are considered a high risk Covid-19 area, Monyake is impressed with their efforts to keep both their crew and visitors safe. He also believes that their facilities and the unique experience they offer travelers from all walks of life will continue to attract them to The Blue Train as over 9000 people from around the world make their way to South Africa to experience this national treasure. “The best attribute of The Blue Train is its ability to ‘stop time’, if only for the duration of the experience which is paced in a way that allows guests to truly surrender to the luxury of slow, and take their time to indulge in some of the finest food and beverage, and hospitality excellence.” “The train itself is pristine and hark to old world glamour with all the trimmings of a modern travel experience and the windows of The Blue Train are easily the best view of our beautiful country.” The Saturday Star